Well, welcome to the Environment Select Committee this
afternoon, uh, for the annual review of the Energy Efficiency and
Conservation Authority. Uh, we welcome you here.
Uh, you have one hour with us, uh, this afternoon
and, uh, members will have plenty of questions.
But we'll hand it over to you to start with your opening
remarks and insights. So thank you.
Mm-hmm. Um, ƒ10 koto ka tua, and thank you for the
opportunity to appear before the committee
today. I have the privilege of being the chair
of, uh, EECA, and to my left is Dr Marcos Pelinao,
who's the chief executor.
As you're aware, EECA is the government's authority on energy
efficiency and its delivery arm on the related
programs. It's been globally proven that energy
efficiency is instrumental in achieving more with less
(1) and system, and provides better
outcomes. I'm pleased to share with you today
EECA's achievements for '24/'25, a year in which
EECA sharpened its focus to align with the government's priorities
of strengthening energy security and improving energy
affordability. The change in government's direction
last year set a very clear expectation for EECA to
concentrate on practical, market-based measures that
reduce pressure on the energy system and to help keep costs
down. In response, EECA streamlined its
programs and prioritized the highest value interventions
and accelerated work that directly supports greater security of
supply and lower energy bills for New
Zealanders. EECA's key role is on the demand
side of the energy system. Reducing unnecessary
energy use is one of the most cost-effective ways to improve
reliability and affordability.
Every unit of energy
eases pressure on the system and helps avoid higher costs to
consumers. EECA's regulatory role is central to
this. In '24/'25, EECA's energy
efficiency standards and regulations delivered more than 1.5
petajoules of savings, which is equivalent to the annual use of
power in over 36,000 homes, and it's
around $37 million in national benefits.
The recently approved modernization of EECA's legislative framework will
enable these two tools to expand even further to support
system resilience and consumer
affordability. Alongside the
regulations, EECA continues to provide practical advice to
inform households and businesses on how to reduce their energy
costs and manage demand more effectively, particularly
during peak periods when the network is under the greatest
strength. These well-targeted information
programs have actually demonstrated impact.
For instance, the Switch On Efficiency campaign
delivered in the order of $2.50
return for every dollar invested, and the more recent
Winter Energy Campaign actually had a bit higher return
than that.
EECA continues to work with industry to help bring forward new
technologies, demand flexibility solutions, and new, new
fuels into, such as woody biomass and biogas,
because they offer real opportunities to reduce operating cost,
defer supply-side investment, and strengthen system
resilience. Looking ahead, EECA has
realigned its '25/'26 program to focus squarely
on where it can deliver the greatest impact, improving energy
affordability, and supporting a reliable and resis-resilient
energy system, and contribute to New Zealand's economic
wellbeing. We welcome any questions you may
have of us.
Brilliant. Thank you for that overview.
Uh, we'll go first to Megan Woods.
Thank you. And I just ha-have a O primary and some supps around Warmer Kiwi
Homes. Um, and thank you. I think one
of the really useful metrics that EECA always does is
calculating the value, um, that is generated out of
that program and $4.36 in terms of wellbeing
and energy, um, benefits. So, um, well worth money
invested. Um, when does your funding for Warmer
Kiwi Homes, what is your current funding for that program?
When is that through till?
Mm-hmm.
Go, it goes to the end of '26/'27. So
there's no further funding in the year '27/'28.
And the grants, uh, are about 55 million
this year,
53 next year, and then 49 the year after that.
Oh sorry. Sorry, I was looking at the wrong appropriation.
76 million and then 83 for the last two.
Thank you. Um, are you doing work,
um, around preparing cases for continued funding for Warmer
Kiwi Homes?
We think the case for Warmer Kiwi Homes, as you mentioned,
uh, is really strong, but that's a decision for the government to make.
Right. Okay. Um, just in terms of,
um, the targets within there, um, that there were some
changes, um, to the criteria this year.
Um, the... So in terms of the seven, eight, so the deciles
seven, eight, and nine, which had been the original targets, how,
how many of those target decile households had been reached do you think
you got to around, um-... 80, 70, 80% of those
houses?
For eight, eight and nine-
Yeah.
(clears throat) I th- Without giving a, a definitive answer, it is
probably
somewhere between 70 and 80% of those homes.
And so since August 2025, we added
deprivation areas five and six.
Sure.
Um, so we were really pleased to be able to expand the criteria and
expand the program. It's just had a much
s- dialed down grant portion, because those areas are more likely
to be able to pay for, afford it.
And are they? What's the uptake like?
It's good. There's still many homes left to do.
There's h- hundreds of thousands of homes left to do.
But in terms of the targets for this year?
We are, uh, on track for the targets of this year.
Mm-hmm.
Good.
One of the things, sorry, just one more, is that, um, there was
previously funding for the hard-to-reach households, the Hard to Reach
House- Households Program, because we know many of our
most energy-deprived homes, there's multiple, there's
multiple situations and layers happening within their household.
And actually having trusted providers going in and establishing those
relationships, in terms of being able to continue in that eight and
nine, um, decile, do you think we would need another
dedicated fund to be able to make further inroads into the remaining
20 or 25% of those houses?
Those,
I mean, they're hard to reach homes because they're hard to reach, so there's a
general mistrust.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and I think if EECA just rocked up-
... we might not have the door open.
But we partner with-
(clears throat)
... community providers to help get that access.
And-
(clears throat)
... the funds that we've taken from MBIE, the Community Resilience Energy
Fund and the supporting, um, Energy Education and
Communities Fund, we've used those to get the
most, uh, access or improve our access with our program.
So, we've been
going as far as we can to reach those homes with the funding that
we have.
Just got a supplementary on that from Cameron Luxon.
Can you say why there's mistrust, did you say?
Uh, I think it's-
I mean, seriously.
I think it's like-
You seem like friendly people.
We are friendly people. Um,
I,
n- not being in communities around New Zealand, just being Wellington-based means
that it's hard, uh, for some, for
an unknown person to come and just knock on somebody's door and open it.
So, what we found is if you can partner with a trusted messenger, like a
community, like a community group or, uh,
even just, um-
So, it's, as you just said, there's general let, you know, distrust of people from
Wellington. It's just-
No, the government-
Oh, the government. Oh, fine.
The government are here to help, yeah.
Yeah, oh, okay.
And that's why the Warmakibi Homes-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, Program has been so successful, because we do partner
with community-
Mm-hmm.
... organizations which are actually touching these, these homes for
various reasons. And it's been very successful over the life
of the Warmakibi Home Program. And it's been in different guises,
as the minister has raised. Um, you know, there's always changing of settings.
But-
But that's one of the reasons why it has been very, very successful in New Zealand.
There's also, um, we've also got feedback that, you know, because we're
offering sometimes when we partner with third-party providers, like a free
insulation for these homes, they don't trust the free.
Mm-hmm.
They're like, "There must be-"
So, don't trust anything the government gives you for free. Yeah.
"There must be, there must be something to it."
So, sometimes we'll partner with religious leaders or community
leaders to just even say, "Hey, this offer is actually legit."
That makes sense.
Yeah.
There's nothing more expensive than something un... Yeah.
And Megan, you've got a supplementary.
I, I, just on that, I mean, I've had multiple phone calls as a
constituent MP. People saying, "This crowd's just-"
You answered my question.
No, I'm just saying that they've rung and said, "This, this crowd's offering me
something free. Is it legit?"
Yeah.
So, they thought it-
I thought you said it's going to cost you in the long run,
They think it's, no, they think it's a scam.
Fair enough then 'cause it is.
Um-
Well, it's not a scam.
Next question, next question-
No, no, no, I don't have-
... is Scott Willis.
Yeah, go
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um-
(laughs)
... and I, and I appreciate your, your work with those third-party providers.
And we know there's a lot of mental health issues out there-
Mm-hmm.
... that make things challenging. Whanau navigators can be incredibly helpful.
But my question is about the energy policy
capability, because it received increased funding this year
and is looking to get some more funding next year.
So, given this increase, what progress has been made in
establishing an energy wellbeing network?
Where are we, where are we at, and
where's EECA, what's EECA's thinking on the establishment of an energy
wellbeing network?
And just to clarify so I've got it clear, when you talk about energy
policy increases, that's the MBIE's energy policy
appropriation?
Yeah.
Okay.
Because we, yeah, we don't have a energy policy
program. Um, I think we need to
work with community groups to del- to help us
deliver our messages. So, we know that
the work we did on-
I
just- ... investigating a community energy wellbeing network is that
there are a lot of potential duplication with groups using, you know, their
own resources or having to generate their own resources.
So, one of the things that we can do as an authority is
provide really clear material and advice
that essentially any group can pick up and use.
So, for, with that kind of support is how we would support a
community energy wellbeing network.
We don't have funding to fund one.
Supplementary.
Um, so, at the Energy Affordability and
Resilience Conference last, earlier this year,
there was, there was, um, a good discussion
about the establishment of an energy wellbeing network.
How
is EECA involved in enabling and catalyzing or
in enabling-... that network to be
established, given the strong call from the community energy
sector. The need, the need that we see
for that, that network and for that work to happen.
Yeah. Look, we're really proud of, of the work we do with community groups
and helping energy users. Empowering energy users sits right
at the heart of the strategy. And so when I came in, when I looked at the
organizational strategy, I think MBIE might do the strategic
policy. You get your market regulators with the EA.
From the government lens, we are here to provide information so that energy
users make the best choices for themselves, and businesses as well.
And so a lot of that includes community groups.
Uh, we've been able to do more with less when
it comes to SEEK, so Supporting Energy Education in Communities.
We've been able to do more with less when it comes with Climate Resilience Energy
Fund. And what I mean by that is rather than just having these
solar and battery sit to be only used under
emergencies, we've worked with community groups so that they can
provide resilience all year round.
Um, but saying that, the f- we don't have
funding to s- stand up a energy wellbeing
network. So our support would be using
the authoritative advice that EECA has and being able to
try and reduce the costs for those group- groups that are trying to
do good work in their communities.
So being able to have access to shared resources, being able to
share lessons with each other. Um,
hopefully just kind of res- reducing or removing the transaction costs of them
getting their work done.
So we have a very small amount of funds that have been transferred from
MBIE on the, what's called the Supporting Energy
Education and Communities. It's about $2 million a year, and that will
roll out the next couple of years. That's all the funds we have.
Mm-hmm. And I- I will say that it's worked well because
we are, we are, all of our muscle is on delivery, you know?
So we, we've got a whole bunch of technical advice and insights and analytic, uh,
strength, but because we've got all of our groups and
units set up for delivery, when we got those funds, we were able to
just find a whole bunch of savings but still keep delivering really strong
impacts. So the split between policy and delivery I think
works very well between EECA and MBIE.
So a couple-
Yeah, I just-
... a couple of supplementaries.
... had a supplementary. Yep.
Yeah. So, um, and I get that, and I understand the work that EECA
does. And I also understand that sometimes delivery isn't simply
material intervention. It is also that, that education,
that support, that that's where that community part plays a
really big, big, big role, and it, and also in building
the trust as you
talked about earlier. So that, that thought of
how do you apply resource to supporting
building trust in the community to, to have the knowledgeable people who are
working at the flat roots to deliver for particularly
those hard to reach? What, where is, where is
the, the component of EECA's work that supports that
bit? Um, go on.
The Supporting Energy in Education and Communities Fund
is probably, like, the main vehicle that we would use.
It's reached over 15,000 households.
It's delivered 197 low-cost energy-saving
devices. The independent evaluation that was done on it
showed a $2.21 benefit per dollar spent, so we
know the benefits are real. We think there's probably about
300,000 households in energy hardship, so there's a lot of, uh,
people that can benefit from that kind of advice.
And SEEK is our main program for delivery.
And, um, and on the, uh, data question
that's related to what you- you mentioned earlier,
uh, you have access to a number of, um, to a number of data points in
relation to the Warmer Kiwi Homes program.
And I'm aware that EECA was heavily involved in the Energy
Wellbeing Evaluation Consortium some time ago, and
you've, you've provided in-kind support for the secretariat
of that in the past. Is this something that EECA would look
for, look towards to supporting for that, that
data capture for building a greater knowledge
base of, of the extent of energy hardship or wellbeing in the
community? And, and if so, how would you
look to continue to be involved?
Yeah. Well, without being able to see the details of the proposal, I wouldn't be
able to commit to being able to support it or not support it.
But we are committed to delivering on the government's objectives,
affordability and security of supply.
And so, uh, if there was a proposal
and, uh, we were working with, with
MBIE, and it would go through a normal process to be considered.
It's not a proposal. It's, uh, the Energy Wellbeing Evaluation Consortium
has been an operational success.
It, it, the only way-
Yeah.
... that we could have-
I think we covered that.
... uh, could do it is through our baseline funding.
Yeah.
If there's, if there are sufficient funds within their baseline
funding-
Yeah. ... we would actually lean in and support the communities to do that.
But that's the only vehicle we've got, unless there is a specific
appropriation.
Mm-hmm. And,
Tha- thank you.
Thank you.
Look, I think we've got a supplementary over here on that. Grant?
Yeah. I just, um, I'm curious how the, um, how it's being
received, uh, in, in the sort of regional breakdown.
Sort of been, uh, for particular- uh, the more highly deprived areas like, um,
MBIE for Northland-
Yeah.
... how it's being received, how you make, progress you make in areas like
that?
Really well received. So I work with Peter in Foundation North-
Mm-hmm.
... pretty closely. I've met with Dylan recently, the new CE there.
A lot of the work that we do is through, um,
philanthropic or third-party funders who have more of a community connection.
But, uh, the programs, either the
advice or Warmer Kiwi Homes, uh-...
has been very well received there.
It's a, it's a challenging area because, um, of the
remoteness.
Mm-hmm.
But I think all parts of New Zealand should be able to benefit from these programs.
I'm also proud of our recent work in the Chatham Islands, and
being able to bring warmer Kiwi homes insulation and efficient heating
there.
And just to quickly lift up, and who, there are...
you got enough providers to actually deliver the services in the north-
Yeah.
... for example?
Yes. A- and we... it's not only foundation that we're working on in
Northland. Uh, we work through the Ngapuhi tribes in Troon.
So, Triarm's been very supportive of us.
Thank
So, we are actually getting to those hard-to-abate areas through
those connections to the iwi communities.
Thank you.
Thank you. Look, we'll go back to Megan Woods for a primary question.
Thank you. Thank you. Um, EECA has a particular role to play
in energy efficiency, um, as we go through a period of
time where cost and security of supply-
Mm-hmm.
... are front of mind for both households and
businesses. Um, I wonder, um, I know there's a, there's a few
elements that I'd like to explore on this.
But the first is your flexibility pilots, um, your distributed
flexibility pilots that you've been doing.
In your annual report, um, you talk about the potential that a
flexible electricity system could save New Zealand 10 billion by
2050. Uh, could you talk us through some of the work that you've been doing
in these pilots, and where you think we're seeing the most promise?
This is like one of my favorite topics.
(laughs)
I'm gonna be... i- one of my favorite topics.
I am gonna be very pithy, but if members want to...
(laughs)
... uh, they can always come in and get me a pint afterwards, and I'll go on and
on.
(laughs)
(laughs) (laughs)
She is.
So, Chair, I think you need to hold him back on this one as well.
(laughs) Couldn't resist.
Flexibility is just about shifting when demand is
used. Uh, and the reason why it is so important from our
perspective is that the asset, the, the poles and wires that get
built out, they're not being fully used all the time.
They're kind of getting used maybe like up to their maximum 5% of the
time. So, you end up with over-spec'd, under-utilized
assets, and they're costly. So,
any time that you can sort of smudge out demand and level it
out a bit, it means that you get better utilization of your assets.
And it means that as a lines company, you're able to defer or plan out a
much sort of longer tail of asset replacement, asset
improvements. And that's where significant...
that's where the significant bulk of the 10 billion figure comes from, is
in this kind of better asset management.
On top of that, you obviously get people saving money in their
homes, people keeping money in their back pockets.
So, to answer your question, we've started off by partnering with
six of the lines companies, given that's where we think a lot of the value st-
sits, the large ones, um, Vector,
Powerco, Counties, et cetera. And what we are looking at is
scaling up the effort to be able to really
understand the value, but also inform our activity as a product
regulator. So, because we look at energy performance standards
for appliances, we need to know how,
um, how these different pieces of kit respond to demand
signals. And I just want to note that this isn't just for
one end of town that have EVs and solar panels and all that kind of
stuff. We've been looking at retrofitting really cheap
$150 controls on existing hot water cylinders.
Basically, the Ripple control system, but next
level.
So, it's accessible for everyone, that kind of, this kind of flexibility.
And the early results from the pilots have found that households are
saving 7 or 8% off their bills.
Oh, wow.
7 or 8%?
7 to 8%-
Yeah.
... off bills right now. And that, and-
？
That doesn't even count all, you know, all the system benefits-
Yeah.
... that will come up-
Mm-hmm.
... with, uh, network asset
defer.
Yeah. So, what could governments do to accelerate the
uptake of some of the, the things that are coming out of your
trials, like, for example, these $150,
um, retrofits to hot water cylinders?
Mm-hmm.
Interesting.
We, we are big fans of home energy management systems.
But, um, I know the Electricity Authority is doing a lot of work to try
and send the right kind of market signals and price signals.
From where we sit, as a product regulator, what we think
is absolutely critical to get done as soon as
possible is the amendment to the Energy Efficiency and Conservation
Act-
Yeah.
... to-
Mm-hmm.
... essentially do two things. One, ensure that
smartness and connectivity is included as part of the criteria for energy
performance, because at the moment, it's not.
And two, to make our regime fit for
purpose, so that when the executive and cabinet make a
decision, we can enact it. So, at the moment, th-
when the minister and cabinet make a decision with, jointly with Australia, because
we developed standards jointly with Australia, it can sometimes take
years, seven years, for that to go through the drafting
process and become a regulation for us.
So, I don't think that is fit for purpose.
It is a huge gap. The government has signed off an
amendment. So, the government recognizes that this is a problem that needs to be
fixed. They've agreed to fix it. That just needs to now be
introduced into the House and go through the legislative process.
So, we would... We're gonna wa- I'm gonna watch that very closely and
hopefully it'll progress as quickly as possible.
Do you have an indication what, um,
what, um, priority rating the leg has been
given?
No.
No, I can't turn.
Okay.
No.
We should get it in by the end of next year.
Sure.
Can I possess that from me here on that?
So- so- so just to conf- so effectively, you just want to be...
the, the, the leads to be restructured so that you can just make regulatory changes
easily and quickly that are required?
That, that the cabinet, that, that when the Cabinet makes that-
When the Cabinet say yes to it, then bank.
Bank.
As opposed to have to go through a long process.
Yeah.
There's a lot of red tape.
Okay. We'll go to Scott Willum-
It was a good
sub. ... and then we'll come back. Megan, yeah.
Excuse me.
Yeah.
So, I want to come back to, um, to healthy homes.
... briefly. The, um, EECA, EECA did manage-
Yeah.
... some MBIE funds for the COVID, COVID recovery response-
Okay.
... in both Otago and the Far North.
And that, they were pilots looking at what a deep retrofit
program would look like.
Hm.
I know that EECA has had cuts in funding over the last two budgets,
but, um, sh- should there be
a
budget uplift
at any point in the future, is that deep retrofit
program that can particularly reach out to the
hard-to-reach something that EECA is able to, to put back
on the table? Is... Would some- Is that something that you would be interested in,
in, in bringing back
and
having run those pilots and seeing what came out of
them?
If the governments chose to actually stand it up, we could stand it up and deliver-
Sure.
... but political decision.
Yeah. We could-
We could-
... execute it.
We could execute
what we are asked for from the government quickly.
So it is a, it'll be a political decision as to whether they want to
priori- prioritize that program or not.
But we have all of the machinery and muscle to do
that.
Okay. So there's a sub-
Yeah.
... sub to that. So given the, the number of Warmer Kiwi Home
installations were 24,866, I
think-
Mm-hmm.
... um, below the target. Is that, um, due to lower
demand for heating-
Yeah.
... installations or, and, and I guess what,
what plans are there for using those unused funds
to, to, to get to places?
Yeah. So we were slightly below targets.
That target is a blended target between efficient heating and
installations. So the efficient heating portion of it was
the bit that was really under target and kind of kept us down.
So what we've made changes this year is to
reproportion more towards installation, less on efficient
heating, um, 'cause we think a lot of heat pumps are getting
high penetration rate through the market.
It's a multi-year appropriation, so anything that might be underspent will
be able to get carried forward an- and used.
So-
(clears throat)
... plans are in place to this year, this year to ensure we h- we hit the target.
Um, thank you. Look, we'll come back to Megan for a question.
Okay. Thank you. Um,
so I want to continue on that theme about the role that ke- that
EECA can play in helping make our energy system more
affordable and more secure. There's obviously your flexibility
pilots. Glad you got to talk about that, Marcos.
There's so much more to talk about than we-
(laughs)
... I may come back to it if there's time.
Um, the other piece of work that I'm really interested in is what you
can do with industry. So, of course, the RETA, the
Regional Energy Transition Accelerators, if I recall
it-
Mm-hmm.
... um, have completed their work.
There's an awful lot of data, um, that was produced out
of the RETAs. What's happening with that information now and how are
we picking it up so that we can
help, um, keep jobs in, in the regions of New Zealand?
Yeah.
So Wellington region is getting finalized.
Then there will be an all of New Zealand RETA summary report that is gonna come
out very shortly. And, uh,
that will be the natural conclusion of that program. But we are use...
I mean, the insights are freely available for anybody to
use, but we are using it in terms of our
targeting. So to try and take the next, the so
what of doing the reports. So for example, we put out to
market, um, a biomass hub RFP. So that is looking
at unlocking supply and demand and addressing the market coordination
problem. We are targeting areas that we know through RETA
have high biomass potential-
Yep.
... for both supply and demand. Uh, we've also, last
winter, this, this previous winter, we were on the ground,
boots on the ground, running, um,
I don't like to use the word workshops 'cause people have different opinion of
ideas of what a workshop is. We were running
action meetings with businesses
in each of the regions to help them reduce their
energy, uh, right now. And we were using insights from RETA
about where those businesses were, but also what their options are.
So we started with energy efficiency first, not surprisingly.
We did supporting audits, supporting walkthrough, um,
assessments. We found a lot of businesses were able to save 10 to
30% off the bat. That helped them right now.
Mm-hmm.
And then we talked to them about planning
for what their options might be should they want to do something
else. And using the insights from RETA helps inform, um,
those, those discussions.
So I think
I mean, hugely value- Sorry, Eleanor.
The v- the value of RETA actually came to the fore when,
um, the work we did around the East Coast of the North
Island identified who were the gas users-
Mm-hmm.
... and the opportunities of them moving and shifting when gas
was at a short supply. So that baseline work that was done several years ago
was invaluable in terms of the opportunities of how
we could actually shift them to other fuel sources.
Thank you. And that is a perfect segue way that, um, with it,
there's such a rich body of knowledge that sits
within the, the RETA work. Um, has
government requested, um, any insight from
EECA around what a gas prioritization plan might look like
so that we were, um, running a New Zealand
best interest test over how we do it and looking at
what we could do to transition some of the, the cheapest and the
easiest, um, transitions that would be...
Have you been asked for advice by ministers for that?You know, so
I- w- I have not been working on a gas prioritization
plan.
Mm-hmm.
Um, I think that's a question for MBIE.
Yeah.
But we have provided our reader data and all
of those insights to MBIE to help inform the policy process.
Your work that you've done around energy efficiency,
um,
as you've identified, can save, um, huge amounts
for- for businesses. Um, often that's seen in
terms of their- um, their electricity use
and- and electricity efficiency.
Um, is there scope and capability f- within ECA to run
a parallel gas efficiency program that would mean
that businesses, um, can still get what they need but
reduce their usage and their costs?
Absolutely.
100%. So energy is fuel agnostic, if that makes
any sense.
So we, whether- if it's somebody burning coal or somebody
using gas, we are here to help them make the most of their energies.
So to get us through this transition-
Mm-hmm. ... um, that it would be possible for us to scale
up what we're doing with some of our gas
industrial users, um, so that they can save
money. Yeah, and it complements this small fund we have around
emerging technologies, whether it's body biomass or
biogas.
Mm-hmm. What is the- the- the funding that you have in that area,
Ella?
So it's-
Very small.
... it's the te- it's the Technology and Fuel Enabler
program.
Oh
yeah. So that's supporting the biomass work.
And how much is it?
Um-
Sorry to-
... it is-
You can come back to us.
No, I- I-
I can look it up.
... I can tell you. It's, uh, budgeted for approximately 20 million
each.
Okay, so it's-
A supplementary on that
Yeah.
... and then another supplement as well.
So, um, obviously one of the bigger gas users particularly in- in the
North Island is Fonterra.
Mm-hmm.
At the moment. Have you been ... I know- I know i- as a supplier, they've actually
been working through and- and actually the sale of the brands process is gonna
allow them to speed up some of that, um, um, that work.
Have you been working with them alongside to help structure what they've got?
Absolutely. Yeah.
And-
We- we work through that notwithstanding that that fund is actually now
closed. But a lot of the work of encouraging Fonterra to
accelerate, um, moving away from coal in the South
Island was initiated through our relationship with
Fonterra.
Y- and- and so- and so that's been and that- and now even though- and now they
have to continue to do that themselves regardless of government support in this
space.
They've got that funding.
So they-
They've got the- they've got the technology and they now feel more comfortable
about applying that technology.
Right. Mm-hmm.
And we've done that, the same with other, um, other
mil- companies that they've got operating in the woody biomass
space.
The- the oth- the other area I think relevant to farmers and Fonterra
or agriculture in general is solar.
Yeah.
Solar matters and so we- we are looking ...
we have a program called Solar on Farms.
It is looking at accelerating generation,
uh, with growers and farmers and that, uh, that has been really
well received by the market as well.
Mm-hmm.
Just a quick supple- so is that- is that for them to use internally on their own
properties?
Yeah.
To offset their use-
Correct, yeah.
... own- own usage as opposed to-
It's- ... as opposed to putting in solar farms to export?
It's not a- and it's not a community-based one.
Okay.
It's a specific-
And- and it's a demonstration.
Yeah.
Because, uh, there is a very, um,
s- you know, there's a cherry orchardist who is very passionate about solar
(laughs)
Uh, might what- what might work for a cherry orchard may not work for
a piggery, may not work for a milking shed.
That's
Mm-hmm.
So a lot of the farmers we've talked to said actually they want to
understand the cost and benefits of the system for their type
of business.
Business, yeah.
And so we're doing demonstrations to again get really good
market intel and then help inform the best decisions that
those growers and farmers make for themselves.
So just on that 'cause I might jump in there with a sup- um, because the solar, it
is interesting and how are you actually incentivizing and working with the
businesses and farmers et cetera to obviously try and encourage them
to, uh, purchase the solar panels and, um, you know,
use solar as an option?
So we have the demonstration fund which will part- will offer a subsidy
for mostly the battery component of it.
Mm-hmm.
We've also been talking to providers or consultants like
Farmlands and others on,
um, making the offering as simple
for farmers to be able to evaluate.
Some of the things we've been hearing is that they'll get a provider to come
onto their business, they'll get a quote for maybe 60,000 from one person, a quote
for 200,000 from another person.
Mm-hmm. Exactly.
Which one's right? They, hard for them to get funding, you know,
from their bank or their partner without a clear idea of where
the ground truth is on that.
Yeah.
So we want to help basically remove all of that thinking
or simplify, provide an authoritative lens for
farmers to be able to say, "Yep, this is a trusted provider, a trusted quote.
I have confidence that it's on the level," and then they can go and get
financing for it and then just away they go.
Yeah. And the Solar on Farms program was oversubscribed by the
farmers.
Oh wow, yeah.
So, uh, I think it was-
240 applications for 40 spots. But that's a
demonstration so what we're doing is we're working tho- with those who are not
successful on connecting them with finance and trying to just make that easy.
And the intention is for the- tho- those,
um, being used as case studies.
Mm-hmm.
So it is going to be able to be broadcast to a wider farming community.
And- and the- they'll spread around the country.
Yes. Correct, yes.
So again, just on that before I go back to the fuel switching.
Um, your Solar on Farms, are- is the demonstration spread across
horticultural, pastoral, arable farms so we're looking at the-
the application in different f- different ways as well as different
geographies?
Correct.
Right. Okay.
I think it's about 10 archetypes, four sites per archetype, so 40
in, in, across the whole country.
But it is quite a small fund.
It i- i- yeah, no, it is. And these are demonstration funds and I guess, um,
it's good to hear that Fonterra is able to switch, switch because it was one of the
recipients for GIDI was cut-
Mm-hmm.
... um, by the mini budget in 2023. And I think-
They're not paying for it, so.
... we've seen the, we've seen the-
They're no longer paying for it.
No, no. (clears throat) Just to be clear, Fonterra kept its
funding. (clears throat) It is what's paying for its fuel switching
at the moment.
I, I
They are rolling out those projects.
But, uh, my question is around one of the things that was
developed under GIDI, um, was actually, there was quite a lot of product
development work going on for small and medium enterprises for what
off the shelf switches would be for the likes of glass houses.
Correct.
In terms of, um, switching off gas and moving to, um, heat
pumps. If we needed to accelerate that
work to, to... And as part of a gas
prioritization, ECA, I'm assuming, still holds
all that work that was done that's been shelved and not being utilized?
Yes.
Okay. So we could deploy that really quickly if we chose to.
We're able to deploy it very quickly.
Okay. Thank you.
Um, Scott Willis.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, and I, I have to, um,
acknowledge that
particularly the ECA advisor who was at the Wair- uh,
Wairarapa, Electrify Wairarapa event
was exceptional, um, according to Celia.
And we've been really impressed. So if, if you think of Mike Casey's
example and the, the work that ECA's doing to help with the
electrify or rewiring, Electrify events around the
country, hats off to you. Um-
Thank you.
No, it's, it's, it's, it's great work.
Um, the... I wa- I still want to come back to Warmer Kiwi Homes because
the Warmer Kiwi Homes program
had some changes to it, and you added a s- a
small repair element to Warmer Kiwi
Homes.
I'm really keen to hear how that has gone.
Yeah.
Becau- because in my experience, the small repairs are
sometimes big repairs. And, and I'm wondering how, how
you, you managed, how the program,
that side of the program worked.
Yeah.
If you could give us some detail.
There was a lot of lessons learned from that side of the program.
So what we are trying to do, the objective of it was to try and
get to harder to reach homes, those homes that normally
couldn't get done because they had a small leak or they were missing a few bits
and bobs.
But what we found was that the... It was, it, it was
helpful, but it was not as helpful or as taken
up by our service providers as we
expected. I think it was easier for them to just find another
home that was, that was easier to do rather than necessarily go through
the work to do the small repairs. So
we would have a think... Um, if we had the, you know, if we were
asked to do so, we would have a think about how to
redesign that portion of it to actually
ensure that we are getting access to those really hard to reach homes.
Because I, I think the current model didn't make the most use or
the best use of that, uh, that functionality.
It's still there, we still have it, but we are really thinking carefully
around how we use that to ensure that we are increasing the
number of those really hard to get homes.
Hmm. Thank you. And, and certainly I was aware of the
recommendations that came out of at least one of the pilots, which did
suggest that there needed to be m- much more resource and
flexibility in that resourcing to enable the
essentially problem-solving at, at the flex routes.
And, and it's a trade-off. These are hard trade-offs because when you're looking at
value for money
and getting to as many homes as possible-
Mm-hmm.
... when you start dealing with homes that need a lot of repairs, it gets very
expensive.
Yeah.
So there's a balance that we try and
strike.
Hmm.
Um, I might just quickly ask a question 'cause I was quite interested in your, um,
low emissions heavy vehicle fund.
Yes.
Um, obviously trying to encourage businesses to invest in,
um, you know, electric Utes or bigger vehicles,
tractors perhaps, I don't know. How's that going?
Like how is the technolo- is the technology there to be able
to, you know, use
th- those, those vehicles? Or is it, are we not there yet?
Like how far advanced are we? Because I think there's obviously an appetite from a
lot of businesses and industry to obviously, you know, want to move,
but, um, the reality is it doesn't work in practice, you know.
The technology's definitely there and the fund is, uh, not just for
electric, it's for, um, any low f- low emission fuel, so
hydrogen or dual fuel. There's some really interesting New Zealand
innovators who are looking at dual fuel, so diesel and hydrogen-
Mm-hmm.
... um, out of Christchurch.
The fund is not getting the take-up that we would like it to
get. That isn't the technology problem.
That is because people are not buying heavy trucks at the moment across the
economy.
Mm-hmm.
So
there is a serious downturn in heavy truck purchases.
And so, uh, getting people to buy low emission trucks is
hard when they don't even want to buy a truck, full stop.
So what we expect is that, you know, we'll
adjust
what we do, but we need to... Um, the
wider market needs to pick up before people start buying low
emission trucks. We are doing... We have partnered with national road
carriers, um,
Transport NZ and others to try and bring up the total
cost of ownership. This is one of the big kind of-...
uncertainties that are s- that stop people and stop fleet owners from
buying new technologies, regardless of what- whether it's low emissions or not.
It's just, what's the resale value?
How do I price, you know, how do I cost this into my budget, my assets?
Mm-hmm.
So, as we get data onto that, we are putting that out to the market
so that
companies have that confidence on what the resale value is
and, uh, of the tech. That's- that's one of the big barriers.
Mm-hmm.
So the issue really is to a s- to a provider is, the owner
wants to know the whole of life costs.
So these emerging technologies or new technologies are sound, but no
one's actually run a hydrogen truck for 15 years.
(clears throat)
So- so that- that's an issue. But- but the significant problem that
currently, um, EECA's facing is the economic
downturn in the transport-
Mm-hmm. ... freight business. That freighters have actually shrunk
and their appetite to purchase any new kit-
Mm-hmm.
... is very low.
Hm.
Um, Megan?
Thank you. Um, the New Zealand Green Building
Council, along with
Mm-hmm.
... a few others have produced an interesting report this year around
the savings that could be made in both space and hot wet- water heating-
Mm-hmm.
... across both in industry and
residential homes. You've got your Residential Hot
Water Efficiency Pilot.
Yes.
Um, although the- the funding to be able to do that at a larger scale was
cut. Um, in terms of what are some of the results you're seeing
for the kinds of savings households can be made from-
from some of these technologies? You talked about the $150 retrofit,
which will be part of it, but what are some of the other interesting details we're
seeing come out of that?
So, it's been a really interesting pilot.
We've been really looking at, um, particularly heat pump hot water-
Mm-hmm.
... technology. We- I guess, the headline is that there are
significant savings that can be made.
I don't have a number off the top of my head, but it's- it's-
Yeah.
... I- I think over 10%.
Um, but one of the- what we really learned is that it's not
uniform across everybody.
Yeah.
It really depends on your circumstance, how much hot water you use in your
household, where you are in the country.
Um, the installation
of these units is really important. So when it's done well, it works.
When you- when it's done poorly, performance really suffers.
So, it's been very useful for us as a product regulator
to get this kind of data, because it helps us understand what to look
for when we're monitoring performance.
Have you been looking at, um, AI tools in any
of the- the- the demand management stuff around hot water
as part of any of those trials?
Uh, we have been looking at AI tools for the distributive
flex-
Okay.
... trials-
Yeah. ... to look at how that can be managed with demand, which includes hot water,
um-
Yeah.
... cylinders. We use, um, machine learning and our own
intelligence around, to do the regulatory
compliance work-
Mm-hmm.
... to be able to identify potential areas to look at.
So, um, yeah, there is- there-
there are a lot of partners doing some really interesting AI for demand
management. We're partnering with them through the distributive flex.
Right. Just going back to the- the Residential Hot Water
Pilot, ha- has anything-
uh, uh, will anything emerge from that pilot in terms of what
some of the skills requirement, if we were to do this at scale,
what that would look like?
Y-
You're talking about the- these bad installations across New Zealand?
These bad... Yeah, I think we'll- we'll like, I would like to see guidance get
published and we'll work-
We've got an MOU with Master Plumbers, we've got an MOU with Master Electricians.
Mm-hmm.
We are working with them on developing training modules for their
members, so that-
Does there need to be an accreditation?
So, in terms of-
N- no, you don't... Uh, no, I think any
professional-
That's
Yeah.
... plumber or electrician can-
They can do it, yeah.
But probably, it... Uh, detail, it'll probably be a micro credential to the
accreditation.
That's what I was thinking, yeah.
Yes. There will be a sort of a module related to it.
Yeah. Yeah.
So, we think they're really well placed to disseminate that kind of training-
Yeah.
... but we want to work with them to make sure that the material is best
practice.
Mm-hmm. Scott.
Um, I just thought you might like to know that the
project coordinator for the Otago Home Upgrade Program was so
inspired by the EECA
work on hot water heat pumps that when they upgraded their
kitchen, she installed a hot water heat pump and proudly sent me
photos of the work
I hope it's working well.
(laughs)
Hope it was well installed.
She's very, very happy. Um, uh,
we were talking about EECA providing
i- advice on efficiency, no matter what the fuel.
But in the past, and I'm not sure, I haven't...
The website doesn't seem to have it at the moment, but in the past, EECA was
very, very, um, out there
on- on
emissions reduction, on, I think it was... What was it?
The zero- zero
carbon. It wasn't quite that, but it was a- it was a-
Decarbonization.
Zer- you know, decarbonization.
Gen Zero.
Gen- Gen Zero. 10 less.
10 less.
Gen Less,
that's right. Gen Less, Gen Less, that's right. Is this something that you're still working on?
You're still- y- or is it you've dropped that, and why have you
dropped that, if that's the case?
So, Gen Less is-
Given- given that- that we know that this, the cheapest form of energy and-
and is, um...
I'll- I'll answer the specifics and then I'll answer the big one.
Gen Less, we've retired. So we found, in our market
research, there was a lot of trust in the EECA brand and, um,
and therefore, why carry two brands when you can have one brand that does the
lifting for it? So we retired it and got some
savings, uh, from that.We are
absolutely committed, because it is in our act, to promote,
support, and encourage renewable sources of energy.
Yes.
And a lot of the work we do is around inc- you know,
biomass, solar, biogas. That is all forms
of renewable energy that we support.
When it comes to emissions reductions-
Yeah.
Mm-hmm. ... the government's been very clear that it sees the emission trading scheme as
the primary vehicle to signal action on emission
reduction. So we don't want
to... You know, we support businesses to make
their own decisions, but we will let the ETS do the
pricing.
Yes. Our, our focus has been on the affordability and security of
supply. Mm-hmm.
Uh, I, I've got a quick question around renewable energy,
because, uh, we've been listening through the fast track process and a lot
of the, um, energy companies, electricity companies have come in and said
their biggest barrier to bringing on more renewable energy in New Zealand
is, uh, consenting. Just because it's just taking so long to
consent these
wind farms and just, all the renewable energy.
Do you think that, um, you know, the policies that will make it
faster to... You know, with the new changes coming through, the fast track in
RMA and... will make a difference in terms of
bringing, bringing that renewable energy and, and the electricity
on, you know?
Uh, I mean, I really can't comment on that.
I think the, um... I've... We've heard the same
thing.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, that con- that consenting is a challenge.
But it's outside of our... something in it, uh, a space that we don't get
into. So, anything that improves consenting, I, I think
would help those developers.
Mm-hmm.
Um, I would say that demand flexibility and being able to manage
demand and create more space on the system is also going to help.
That's another thing that flexibility does.
It's gonna help bring on more renewables faster.
Yeah. Thank you. Megan.
Um, the government, of course, has a role to play in this.
Um, not just as a policymaker and a regulator and a funder, but as a
user of electri- oh, of energy, and a- and a large amount of
energy. Um, uses a large amount of gas actually, which
probably could be used for far greater fi- higher values
than heating our hospitals and our schools, which we currently are
doing. Um, ECA previously was, uh, providing
leadership in terms of solar on schools and some of the
work that was happening around solar on our hospitals.
Um, what progress is being made on that, um,
and, um, are we looking to scale it up at
all?
Uh, so we have part of the Community Resilience Energy
Fund, uh, we have a portion of that to support solar on
schools. So we are in conversations with the Ministry of Education
on doing that. Any decisions to scale up or not are
with, you know, with the government.
But if we can-
Have you been providing advice on how it could be scaled up?
If we get asked to, we could deliver it.
We've been in conversations with MBIE on the opportunity for
solar on government.
Yeah. Um, and do you have good data
around what it would do in terms of the amount of gas that could
be freed up, and also what it would do in terms of decreased
cost for energy for the government, um, by going, for going
through these projects? On the basis of what we collected from
RESSA at a regional level, yes. So you, you would be able
to provide all that data to government should they ask? Yes.
What's available, yes. Um, in terms of
the state sector decarbonization work, some of that
survived, didn't it? No, none of it. No. Okay.
None of, none of it survived, but it was, it was, um...
We've been monitoring it because sometimes it takes years for the
projects-
That's why it's still occurring.
So it's the residual before it was cut in 2023.
It's, it's the... Yeah, the responsible contract management of those
projects.
Okay. Speaking of which, perfect segue way, Gidi.
Um, so, um, excitingly, we'll have the electric arc
furnace, um, but, um, near to, to
whirring away and providing a continual basis for
steel making in New Zealand, um, which is a win.
With this sort of number of Gidi projects, including the Fo- all of the
Fonterra projects, um, that are working their way through the
system, um, what are we seeing in terms of
the, um,
the, the kind of the roll out, the success some of those...
I mean, steel's actually gone up in the number of,
um, emissions that we'll save, isn't it, the steel deal?
Yeah, I think initially it was about 100... or 800,000 tons.
It was, yeah.
It's expected to go to one million tons of saving.
Wow.
Gidi's funded a total of 147 projects.
Yeah.
Of that, you've got, uh, 100 that are complete, 14
that are in progress, and then 33 that were canceled.
So how many have Fonterra done with its funding?
Fonterra have five projects that are funded.
They've completed three and they've got two in progress.
That's great. And-
And there was-
How much was that GIDI fund? It was 90 something-
So ECA provided 90 million, Fonterra put in 700 million.
That's right. Yeah, yeah. Pretty good value for the
government in terms of abatement too.
The net benefit of GIDI, we estimate to-
Subsidizing-
... to be about 4.17 billion.
Yeah. What, what was the marginal...
What was the abatement rate on... I mean, the...
It was about $19 I think for the New Zealand steel deal in terms of
the, the c- the cost of carbon compared to hundreds of dollars if we have to
buy credits overseas. But with that going up to a
million tons of carbon being removed, that must be down
even further.
It, it-
Would that be based on this, the original?
It is further down. I don't know the New Zealand steel one for s- specifically.
The overall GIDI-Um, marginal abatement cost,
which is the government's portion of it-
Not the total project. The government's portion
was, uh, is $12.72 per ton.
Right. And, um, ETS credits are currently even at their collapsed
state trading at 40-something dollars?
I think so.
Right. Sounds like we need money-
Uh, look, we're gonna have to, uh, wrap it up there.
We have, uh, met time today, so, uh-
It went fast. ... thank you very much for your time. It does go fast (laughs)
. (laughs) I could just-
Any, uh, questions? Uh-
I think this work you do is really important, so thank you committee for having
us and inviting us in-
Yeah. And thank you for all the work you're doing as well-
We are-
Um, you know, really important work, so thank you.
Thank you. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And thank you very much-
Look, it's okay
... for the complimentary comments.
Yeah,
Really appreciate it.
That's all right. It was an essential
missing...
(laughs)
... up
here.
Welcome, Barry, Alan, team-
Hello.
... uh, to the sub-committee this afternoon, uh, for the
annual review of the Environmental Protection
Authority. Um,
so you have a couple of hours with us.
Um, so we will hand it over to you, uh, for your
opening remarks and insights and any analysis you want to
provide. And then, uh, we'll open it up for questions.
We don't, uh, have a specific structured agenda for this
session, um, but we'll kind of, you know, follow a bit of a, a
bit of a program in kind of subject areas.
And, um, we'll, uh, yeah, provide the opportunity
to ask lots of questions of you. So we'll hand it over to
you.
Feel free to help yourself to water before you start as well.
People get very, um-
Yeah, thank you.
Thank you. ... as do I.
Um-
Mm-hmm.
Thanks, Madam Chair, and, uh, good afternoon, committee members.
It's great to be with you here. Tēnā koutou katoa.
Um, thanks for the opportunity to say a few, uh, introductory comments.
Uh, my name is Barry O'Neill. Um, I'm the, uh,
chair of the EPA since April this year,
and I lead a relatively new board.
Um, uh, but we take our governance
responsibilities very seriously, and we're focused and
committed, uh, to the EPA delivering to its
purpose and to meeting the minister's expectations
and priorities. So a little bit about the EPA.
As New Zealand's environmental regulator, we operate a-
under a, a number of different, uh, pieces of
legislation, some of which have wide-reaching
effects on New Zealand's daily life, often in ways that are not
immediately visible to the public.
We are a Crown agent, so we operate at arm's length from
ministers. Our independence in decision-making is
protected by statute, and while we're accountable to the Minister
for the Environment, we're also accountable to the people of New
Zealand through Parliament.
We recognize the importance of maintaining public trust in our
regulatory processes. Transparent,
evidence-based decision-making is key to public and stakeholder
confidence. When the EPA grants approvals or
implements regulations, communities can trust the
safeguards designed, uh, to protect both public health
and environmental sustainability.
Excuse me. New Zealand's natural environment is the cornerstone of our
economy, cultural heritage, and unique
biodiversity. And while our economy is dependent
on the primary sector, our environmental
integrity also supports agriculture and
horticulture to prosper.
In undertaking our role, we balance environmental,
social, economic, and safety factors.
We are mindful of the need for ec- economic growth, while at the
same time achieving the required level of environmental
protection. The two are not mutually
exclusive, but the balans- balance will change
over the years and with, uh, different
governments. And as the Parliamentary Commissioner for the
Environment wrote, "Environment and economics are a
marriage of convenience, but also a marriage of
inconvenience." We welcome the Ministry of
Regulations review into the AGM's, and we've made
substantial progress in several key areas, which I'm sure we will
talk further about today. We have significantly increased
resourcing, um, and have worked with MPI to
establish a Sector Leaders Forum and have identified
key areas that will improve our ability to process
applications in a more timely manner.
And these are included in the so-called Omnibus Bill,
which is currently being drafted.
We also received $10 million in funding in Budget
'25 to modernize our human health and
environmental risk assessment models, which will happen over the
next two years. And-This is a priority for us.
And prior to Christmas, we hope to deliver two early
sub-projects related to that piece of work.
Fast Track continues to be a significant focus for the
organization and board, and will no doubt continue to do
so in the year ahead. And rightfully so, it's such an
important and challenging area for both the EPA and
for the country.
So, um, Madam Chair, I'd just like to conclude by acknowledging and
thanking, uh, our minister, Penny Simms, for supporting our
work, along with the EPA team, some of which are here
today, uh, for the huge amount of work that they have done
over this last year and continue to do.
And I'd also like to thank, uh, Ngāi Kahauhoto
Te Kāinga Taiao, our statutory Māori advisory committee, for the
sound advice that we receive from them.
Finally, you will be aware that Alan, our CEO, has
announced his intention, uh, to step down from his role as
CE of the EPA. Alan has led the
EPA with vision and energy, and I'd like to take this
opportunity to acknowledge and thank him for his significant
contribution to the EPA over the 10 years he
has been our CEO. And of course wish him all the very best in his future
endeavors. Thank you, Alan.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, we look forward to continuing our work to ensure New
Zealand's environment re- remains protected and enhanced for
future generations, and look forward to the questions and discussions
this afternoon. Thank you.
Look, thank you Barry for those opening remarks, and- and we echo
and acknowledge, um, your, uh-
Thank you.
... service and, uh, work as well, Alan.
So, uh, look, we're gonna, um, hand it over for questions.
Uh, we will start, um, the session looking at, uh, the cost
reduction program that, uh, you have ongoing and the overall
performance of the EPA. And we're going to start with a question
from Lam Farm.
Thank you, Chair. I just actually had a sort of overarching big picture
question to start-
Yep.
... if that's okay. Um, so thank you for those opening comments and thank you for
your service, uh-
Oh, thank you.
Um, so my first question is just about the
EPA's role. Um, and you're- you're very explicit
about the protection of the environment and
people. And we heard from MfE earlier that they see
their role as more about environmental systems,
and that's their responsibility.
Why is the EPA's role so explicitly about
environmental protection, and why does that differ from
MfE?
So I'll have a go at answering that, and then hand over to others that may have a,
a kind of, additional comments. We're established under the
Environmental Protection Authority Act, and it
explicitly states our purpose.
Mm-hmm.
And we are a regulator, and we are charged
with implementing the environmental legislation that we've been
tasked to administer. So we have a specific focus-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, determined by the legislation that we administer basically.
Thank you.
Yeah, I g- I guess it's- it's quite a hard question to answer in a way, because
it's obviously the vision of Parliament in- in the way, uh, it was set up, or at
least, um, uh, Nick Smith at the time.
So it's not unusual to have a ministry like MfE as your sort of
policy shop, uh, doing the policy work, and, uh, an
EPA at the operational end of their environment.
And that would certainly be true of some but not all,
um, of our correspondent organizations in Australia.
At the state level, we see the same type of structure.
Okay.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, Rachel Brooking has a question.
Yeah, and again, it's quite a- a general, um,
and- and, uh, um, you've got a lot
of change and reduced staffing.
So, um, could you talk us through how that's
impacting on the different parts of the
organization?
I- I think the biggest impact we went through last year which was,
um,
uh... I'll get my numbers right. Someone will correct me.
We disestablished 43. Just can't quite find the page
at the moment. Uh, a number of those, I think about 25 were actually vacant
in- in '23, had, um, individuals in them.
But we will correct that if I've got that wrong.
Uh, the biggest impact was we took out our engagement team, uh, and that's had a
big impact in respect of, uh, working with
stakeholders, uh, working with industry.
They were the team that was the front end of that.
So quite a lot of that work has fallen back on the business units, and actually the
people who are doing, making the decisions or assessing the applications are
having to do the stakeholder work.
So we've just had a- a look at our compliance team
area, uh, and compliance around the world is- is moving into a more
modern... Well, not modern but has moved on to a more mature phase
of, uh, trying to engage rather than punish.
So we're looking at, um, investing again in specific, um,
engagement people on that team, uh, to try and pick up that slack.
So that's been a big impact. I think the bigger, um, and
a number of core roles that filled gaps, uh, we've had to,
um, uh, move different functions over to the o- other individuals
and other teams to manage those. So that with Fast
Track, with Gene Regulator, has- has put quite a lot of pressure on the
organization.
Right, okay.
Can I just add to- to that? Um, as far
as, um, reductions, um, in
appropriation, I think we've been, um, less impacted
than other government agencies when I look at what's happened
in, um, the gov- public s- uh, system and service.
So while we've had to make the- that cutback and the 4.1 million
or whatever it was of savings, it- it- it was less than what
others percentage-wise have to find.
And, uh, the... Alan, you just told us about the
engagement teams, uh, going, so that was from
throughout the organization. Yeah.
So, engagement te- teams on chemicals and engagement
Yeah. We used to run a centralized model, so we had one engagement
team that serviced all what we'd call the business units.
Right.
Uh, and to find the savings, to find what was
effectively,
um, of the four million, another t- two million of that was in
personnel. We had, we had to look around at the team and we preserved our
operational processing teams-
Mm-hmm.
... and looked at the engagement stakeholder
area.
Yes, Lan?
Um, just picking up on the
point you raised about y- your preference would be to engage rather
than punish. Is it without those engagement
teams, like you're saying, that you, you're finding that you actually do need them?
But are you essentially backed into a corner where you actually need
to take more punitive measures because you haven't had the opportunity to
engage?
Um, I wou- I wouldn't say that we've been backed into the corner.
Oh,
no. No. But I think we've had, uh-
Oh, no.
... we've had a review undertaken by, um,
some pretty skilled regulatory experts out of Australia
who also, um, you know, who, who are on the sort of
edge of the maturing area of compliance and there's a lot of focus now
on education, on running campaigns-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, to regulated parties,
uh, to educate them, bring them up to speed on legislation, again
remind them what their obligations are.
And that's a worldwide shift in compliance.
Um, when you look at, um, both in Australia and around the world where
compliance thinking is shifting, it's changing all the time.
Mm-hmm.
And it sort of goes in waves. You know, you, you go back
if y- I don't know if you're aware of the compliance triangle, but you have people
at the top who, who simply won't comply and you've got people at the
bottom who don't simply because they don't understand ????????.
So, um, it, it's a maturing of our model because we're
pretty early in our compliance, um, evolution.
We've only had, uh, compliance powers of the level we now
have for about the last four years.
Mm-hmm. Thank you.
I've just got a supplementary on that.
Yeah, on, on this, um, CME role that you've got, so I guess you've all
work... always had some CME for hazardous substances
and-
Yeah.
... those things, but you've got more of the RMA type-
... um, CME. If you could, um, describe what that is
to us, that would be useful, and then with, um, different
reforms, and we've heard Minister Shane Jones and others,
um, talk about the role of regional councils and that's up for discussion, so
presumably, um, there could be more, a, a
larger role for the EPA in, in CME? How, how do you think
that that would work? Compliance, monitoring and enforcement, CME.
A-, AKA yeah, we get used to those, uh, acronyms.
Yeah.
I think I've done it in a number of tiers that-
Sure.
... uh, EPA's compliance team is across all of our
pieces of legislation and, and in fact, the, perhaps the most
dominant areas where the team has been tied up has been,
um, uh, in the ETS area, in the
forestry and science response act.
There's a lot of work in there where, um,
individuals haven't either been submitting their returns
correctly, uh, are getting those wrong or
deliberately getting them wrong, and we've had to take up compliance activity and
we've got a number of fines out related to those and we work through
MPI, so that's a big area.
Mm-hmm.
The other big area of focus has been ozone depleting gases.
We, we, um, we're in the middle of,
uh, legal proce- uh, legal proceedings against an
individual who was importing those, um, illegally into the country and that was a
joint exercise of Customs and Police to, to find those.
HSNL is a big area. RMA, of course, Mr.
Parker had quite a vision for us working in RMA
that, uh, didn't quite eventuate, so we have a small RMA
team that will only go out really when we have good
evidence that the regional council,
uh, perhaps it's not involved or has invited us to come
out and act independently for them.
Uh, the, the point about a wider, um,
responsibility across regions, uh, I have, at
least in the last five years of my term, that has been on and off
again, uh, in discussions with a variety of ministers and
officials. Uh,
clearly, we... It would be, in the first instance, in my view, it's a
personal opinion, a lift and shift.
You leave people where they are and it's a, it's a change of logo.
I would... Because we don't have people in the field, we don't have the experience
of those, uh, regional compliance teams that sit out there.
Mm-hmm.
Um, so I, I'm... You know, the underlying perspective of that
is you're looking for national consistency and efficiencies through that
process. Uh, we haven't been involved beyond, uh,
very, very, uh, sketchy discussions, and of course,
the, um, uh, the reforms which have been,
um, put out, there's no mention-
No.
... of exactly what's going to happen with the compliance areas.
Yeah.
Uh, out... There would have to be significant investment in the center in the EPA,
um, uh, and there'd have to be, um...
We, we would be relying on those three areas. We couldn't do it ourselves.
Thank you.
Oh, and Celia, you've got a supplementary?
Yes,
I'm very much on this area. Um,
and, um, the
proposed reforms have been misrepresented in some ways as getting rid
of regional council, whereas at the moment, it's only getting rid of regional
council law. Um, if you were
to have to take on
the environmental regulatory compliance
areas out in the regions, how do you see
that, um...... and you talked about
national consistency, but
those regions are very different in their soil types-
Mm-hmm.
... and all sorts, the climate, a number of other things that would
surely make quite a difference. So has the
EPA been thinking about, if it were tasked with
those wider responsibilities, how you would balance the
national baselines and the regional
variations?
Um, the honest answer is we haven't been thinking about it (laughs) .
We have no capacity to think about it and respect that there
is no proposal in front of us. Um, but
our view has always been you would retain the regional
council, um, expertise and staff there.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, you would have to then invest in the center in some type of management
structure. And, and you pro- and might...
Again, personal view is you would call upon those, those experts out in the field
to come in because a- again, you're qui- absolutely correct.
The regional knowledge and differences across the
country. Um, and we see it when we send our R- RMA team
out, that they will go out and work alongside the local people
because you... There's no point in turning up and saying you're from Wellington and
here to help. Um, no.
(laughs)
You can't do that. You've got to work alongside.
Thank you.
So we haven't given any in-detail thought, nor have we been asked to.
We are waiting for MEP and others, uh,
to- Now. ... to work through that.
Um, and-
Last one.
You've got another supplementary?
... oh, yes. On the regional council issues, will you be making a submission,
um, on the potential reorganization? Or...
No. No, we won't. No.
All right. Just coming back to kind of the overall performance and,
um, your, uh, I suppose cost reduction program, because,
uh, a year ago when you were in here, you were talking about, you know, that the
previous, like, fast track system hadn't been cost recoverable and so it
was costing a lot of money.
Yeah.
Um, and obviously now, uh, you're in a better financial
position because, uh, you know, obviously you're
streamlining things, you're creating more efficiency and, uh,
you've got a fast track program now that is cost
recoverable. Uh, I mean, has that made quite a significant difference to the, to,
to the financial position of the EPA?
Um,
I'll answer that in two, two, uh, two segments if I can first,
please. Uh, the first one is we've still got a tail of COVID
MBEA, um, bad debt-
Yes. ... uh, that we're...
And it's been-
We're in the last part getting those projects finished now.
Um, and we're carrying some bad debt.
We will take a reasonable amount of write-offs this year because we haven't been
able to recover that debt. That's not new fast track.
It's, that's the old. Uh, it's worthwhile also pointing out that we're carrying
a significant debt liability, uh, over the waste-to-energy plant
in, uh, Te Awamutu. Um, they haven't paid their bills,
so that's something that may appear in the accounts going forward, uh, next
year separate to, uh, new fast track.
It's a whole new business as a standalone unit.
Um, and we were lucky in, uh, that we had the
capacity and the funding to be able to set that up and build new
business systems right from the word go.
Uh, and it's fully cost recoverable both through the levy and through the fee
system. Uh, that doesn't stop,
um, uh, applicants objecting to the
costs. Uh, and the complexities that we face is to
make sure, um, that the agencies where we're passing
through costs from regional councils or, um, a
variety, DOC or others who are doing the work, that we're
confident about those costs are reasonable.
Uh, and they're not going to be objected to because we are, we are facing some
complexities if an applicant objects to a set of costs.
We'll have to go back to the agencies and say, you know, "Have you got the
time-scheduling right? Have you got everything set?
Uh, will you stand behind those costs, uh, if we end up in court,
uh, around them?" So it's not all straightforward, but, um, with
the exposure and the risk exposure around that is,
um, uh, very, very much
lessened. The overall EPA financial situation is a lot
more complex now. So we, we think about it in three buckets.
We have business as usual, which is Crown-funded, and we aim
to break even on that every year. Uh, we have what
we call specialist functions, which is largely fast track, and that's total
recover- it's totally recoverable.
Uh, and you'll see a lot of cash flowing through the books, uh, on that
in EPA, but that's money in, money out.
Uh, and then there's the levy, which is, um, which we're totally
dependent upon to fund litigation, pay the interest on the
loan, and pay back the loan. Um, the financial
sustainability of both the EPA and,
um... And I don't mean this in a dramatic way, but...
And the fund is dependent on applications.
We need 50 a year for the... up till 2029, uh, for
us to be able to pay the levy back and pay our interest bills.
Mm-hmm.
So, um, you know, it's going okay. It's going well at the moment,
but, um, if, if we don't get 50, then our abilit- then our
financial result can move from surplus to deficit pretty
quickly.
Mm-hmm. But then that new system, obviously, if you had a whole lot of bad debt in
the old system, that wasn't good, right?
So now you have-
No, no. So this is good because people pay upfront.
Mm-hmm.
We have the money in the bank.
Uh, and they can't... They can object though
to, uh, costs and we'll have to... We have to go through a fair process with
applicants if they feel costs have been, um, uh,
unreasonable, uh, because they've already paid, paid their bill.
Mm-hmm. I've just got a couple of supplementaries on this.
Um, Ryan Hamilton and then Rachel.
Thanks. Um, just two things around that fast track, uh, cost recoverables.
We're, we're putting through an amendment potentially in the next week or two, um,
that some councils felt that they couldn't on-charge some of their costs.
Mm-hmm.
And so you might get more pushback-
... potentially going forward 'cause councils are feeling like they're absorbing
some of those costs, so do you see that potentially being more an issue for
you?
Y- yeah, I- I- I, there is a bit of a catch here though, um, w-
we're finding quite a cultural issue with councils and others thinking
they're working in RMA. Uh, they're not.
They're working in Fast Track. So they're doing a lot of work that you would do
under RMA.
Right.
You don't go under Fast Track.
So they're still coming up to speed.
Yeah, so we are having, you know, we're having reasonably
tense discussions at times of saying-
Yeah. ... "You can't pass these costs through, they're not Fast Track." And they say,
"Well, we always do it this way."
Yeah.
You know, the, so we-
Got changes coming.
The- the system is bedding down.
Yeah.
You know, people are getting used to it.
And are beginning to understand they're working under a different piece of
legislation. But you're right, yes, the amendment will be,
um, th- uh, will continue to be an issue.
It's a very, it's quite an expensive process for applicants-
Yeah.
... beg your pardon?
Um, and my second part of the question is around when you just said, um, if I heard
you right, 50, you needed 50 to- to meet your levy or to...
Is that 50 Fast Track proposals?
Yeah, we need 50 applications a year.
Every year till 2029.
But could that be, could that be nuanced with legislation later to be,
if- if there was a slowing, a slowdown of applications or something like
that? Uh, only if we get relief on paying back the loan (laughs) .
Right, right. Okay, so that's based on everything being equal today.
Yeah, so we've modeled, you know, when we received the loan of 10 million, which
was in principle sensible because you're trying to cost recover
all the costs associated with the regime, um, we agreed with
MfE and modeled, uh, how many applications to make the whole financial
system-
Sure, sorry, just one more question on that.
Is that all levies being the same or does it depend on the complexity of the
application?
No, the levy is flat.
Okay.
Uh, yeah.
So- so you might, you might nuance that.
It's 175,000. For all these start-up nation.
Yeah.
Obtained referrals this morning.
So the peripheral nerve, you've got this first and then there's the starting
place, yeah.
So, sorry, did he just conflict with you so you-
You must have come up with the terms.
Just come up, come up and
Because there's two, two different-
... card
thrown here. ... applications in Fast Track. Now, I'll introduce Ross Ferran, our
CFO. You have substantive applications which have come through the listing
process.
Right.
And they pay a set levy, and then you have the referral process now which goes
through the ministers then comes back into the
system. So you have a two-tier levy system.
Yeah.
All right, but going forward you might look at changing that again to make it more-
Well, it's up to Parliament and MfE to-
Okay.
... work with ministers on that.
Thank you.
Um, just a couple of further sups on that.
Yeah.
So Rachel.
Yes, so two, two supplementaries related to this.
Um, one is your comment then, Alan, just that councils
are doing a lot of work that because they're in the RMA headspace rather than the
Fast Track headspace. Could you give us some examples of that
type of work? For instance, is it looking at, um, plan rules and things
like that? Yeah, that's my first one and then the second one is the,
um, amendment, the Fast Track amendment that we have before us
has the regulation-setting ability, um, for the fees and
charges, for the, uh, for the cost recovery rather.
And, uh, and can restrict
those costs and, um, is that
concerning
to the EPA that costs might be
restricted or are there criteria that you think will be included
in regulations that will, um, align with the
word you said before which was reasonable costs?
Yeah, um, I- I think one of the, um, uh,
and I don't want to be discourteous to MfE because we haven't signaled this yet to
them but, um, I'll introduce Richard Preuss who's the manager
of the Fast Track team, uh, and bears the brunt of much of the
pressure. Um, one of the things we're finding is the c- the
costs, um, are well in excess of what we first modeled.
Okay.
Uh, so, um, uh, in the first concept modeling
we thought the costs involving panels, local authorities, uh,
and EPA costs would be about quarter of a million.
It's turning out to be more half a million.
Uh, so we will be making submissions to MfE is that in
February next year there is a review of the levy and
the fees. We'll be making submissions, uh, to increase the
fee, um, at the front end. Uh, I don't think we'll be making a submission on the
levy. That's separate. Um, so it's something they have to be looked at in terms of
the total scheme. And again, this is early days. This is just our...
and it's based on a very small number of, um, applications
at the moment, but we are beginning to get a bit concerned that the overall
cost is, um, probably in excess of what may be applicable or the
levy, uh, was intended to be. Um, so
that's one point. In terms of, um... I'm trying to remember the first point.
In terms of giving specifics-
Oh right, RMA, yeah.
... um, I think we'd be pretty careful but if you think of a
few, p- so Richard may give specifics where we've had costs
brought through that would be more RMA-like than Fast Track.
Yeah, so I think, um, I don't have any specific in terms of, uh,
application, um, samples-
No, no, I just meaning the type-
... but I- I- I think if I was to give an example it would be, um...
So if- if we look at our completeness process, it- up front, uh, an
applicant, uh, provides their application and the EPA is responsible for,
uh, determining whether that application is complete-
Okay.
... um, in line with the legislation.
As part of that process, we go out to agencies to seek their feedback, uh,
where they have relevance. And, and so what we're finding is in some
instances councils, uh, might be doing, uh, quite a
thorough assessment of- of that application up front, uh, when really all
that, uh, that completeness check requires is- is to- to tick it off
against what the legislation requires them to provide.
Um, so there's- there's little things like that that- that add up across
these applications and certainly, um, applicants are- are obviously a-
aware of some of these costs, uh, that are coming through.
And- and it may be that what we're seeing now we have to sit down with MfE and the
local councils, uh, and authorities and see if we
can reset to avoid any change to the fee structure as
well.... um, but it's early days. This is just
early... I mean, we, we've got a handful of decisions in
now. We've got, uh, I think about 19 panels running at the moment,
but we're just getting in the process and learning,
um, uh, everyone's learning how to make the process
work.
Mm. Uh, Lan, thank you. So just a supplementary
for clarity on that panel cost that you thought would be
more like 250K but it's looking more like 500.
Again, it's based on a very small n- number of panels.
Yes, so it's-
Yeah, applicants... We're just-
As a ballpark, yeah.
But just for clarification, all of those panel
costs, because they are, like, clearly demarcated,
they are borne by the applicant.
But you're just saying that the applicant wouldn't have anticipated
such high costs. Is that what you're saying?
Um, I- I'm, yeah, I'll probably explain.
I'm not sure what the applicant anticipated.
We signaled right up upfront that this would be an expensive,
pathway for them.
Mm-hmm.
The cost number I mentioned before, quarter of a million, was everything done
including us, councils, panels, everybody.
Okay.
Uh,
a- and this was the very early modeling by, uh,
MFE, ourselves and others on trying to, um, work
through it. What we're beginning to get a little concerned about is,
uh, the degree to which that, the process is costing
more, whether that will have to be looked at again in February when, uh, they do
the, uh, there's a built into the legislation, these
review, uh, or whether we go back through the local
authorities to try and, I guess, I don't want to say the word
irritate, but, uh, reset how they're looking at undertaking their
work.
Mm-hmm.
Because there is a, a pro- there is a sense that they're thinking RMA is
bust.
Mm-hmm. So- Lan, another supplementary. Thank you, Chair.
Just further to the numbers about you saying you need
50 applications per year to break even-
Mm-hmm.
Um, we've sort of been trying to take stock of how many projects coming
through and to our count there's roughly 27-
Uh, I can give you the-
... in total. ... exact numbers. We've just had that done for me.
Uh, so we've had, uh...
We've had... Since, uh, Fast-Track business was established, we've had
49 applications lodged. Um, we've returned
seven, uh, associated with completeness
issues. Six of those seven have been
re-lodged, um, and we have
seen six overall withdrawn, uh, by
applicants. S- so substandard applications being
pro- processed as of yesterday were 26.
Um, completeness underway,
assessments underway at six. We have two with panels and we have
18, I beg your pardon, not 19 active panels at the
moment. So our trend analysis for this year shows we're on the
way to 50.
Okay.
Um, and it's not break even. We could make more money, uh,
and be able to pay the loan back,
uh, um,
than break even. So we, yeah, with $10 million we have to take back in
five years.
Yeah.
And interest.
And, and we're paying interest every year.
Mm. And so
where is that... If, if, say for
example, the, you know, because like it sounds like you're on
track but you may not consistently make the 50
depending on other constraints and potentially the changes that are coming with
this new Fast-Track Amendment Bill, who
ultimately is it... Just the EPA that is wearing the cost if
Yeah. We'll, we'll, we'll get to the end of five years and not have enough money to
pay back the loan.
Okay.
That, that, that's effectively what will happen.
Uh, and it was always understood and built into the provision of the
loan that should that occur, um, there would be
consideration at the time of the government of the day to whether they would allow
the, that debt to be written off, um, or not by the
EPA.
Okay.
Um, supplementary from Celia.
Yeah. I was really wanting to dig in to the areas
where, um, we say councils are still thinking
RMA-wise rather than Fast-Track-wise.
Is it, um, about what rules apply
or is it, um,
prioritizing different things than you believe they
should? And is it more territorial authorities
or regional or do you, do only deal with regional in this?
Um, I, I think it's everyone is still getting their head around, um,
this legislation. They've worked for so long under RMA
and as Richard said, what we've found when even on the
issue of completeness, they're going well overboard in what they have to do under
Fast-Track. Uh, uh, the
scheme is set up to be moving at pace.
Uh, it's, it's clearly set up to be touching on the key
issues, uh, and not the detailed issues.
Um, and, uh, I, I, as I say, I
think everyone's getting their heads around it and... That, that be fair?
But I'll,
Yes.
I'm not an RMA specialist, nor am I necessarily Fast-Track special.
No, I think I, I think we could probably characterize it as a, a
proportionate, uh, matter. So we'd be looking for the councils to, to
take a, a more proportionate approach to, to the way they assist these
things and, and the amount, uh, detail they go onto, um,
when kind of engaging in the process.
Mm.
Thank you. Uh, now we'll go to Rachel.
Okay. Yeah, this is primary and I've got a couple others.
Oh, can I just... A, a quick sup on that last one?
Okay. Yes, yep.
When you say proportional-
Mm.
... do you mean proportional in terms of Fast-Track
just demanding less in terms of information?
Or do you mean proportional to scale of the
potential, like environmental harm or otherwise?
Um, I'm, I wouldn't go as far as to say that the, the fast track process demands
less, um, but certainly, um, you know, there's time constraints.
Uh, there's, I guess, uh-
Different prioritizations.
There, there is a different prioritization and, and I guess the panel to a certain
extent, once we get in the process, uh, sent the information that
they require or should be sending the information they require.
And so, uh, we'd be looking for responses, uh,
specifically to those information requirements rather than, uh, kind of,
um, broadly taking a stroke of possibility.
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you. It feels like we've kind of moved into the fast track, uh-
Yeah. (laughs)
... topic, uh, obviously.
What a surprise. (laughs)
The topic of interest. So we will just kind of stay on fast track and
we'll take primaries and supplementaries.
So we'll, uh, go to Rachel Brooking.
Thank you. And yes, I agree with you, Alan, that it does have different
priorities, the fast track than the RMA.
Uh, now I'm interested though to go back to some discussions we've had at
previous, um, sessions like this.
And you've been very clear that the EPA is not the decision
maker, uh, that the EPA's role is an
administrative one in terms of helping and providing the
secretariat role. Is that still the case?
That's still the case. Yeah, yeah.
And
has it been your experience that, um, sometimes people
confuse the role of the EPA with the decision
maker?
Yes.
Mm-hmm. Yeah.
Quite, quite often, particularly the media. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah. Noting some media in the back who I'm sure would never do that.
(laughs)
No. No, with due respect. (laughs)
Uh, uh, so Barry, this is a question for you and I'm
interested to note that Minister Shane Jones, um, has said
that he thought that there were astounding decisions by, made by the
EPA not to allow fast track consent applications to be
modified during the application process.
And then on the news of Alan's, uh,
resignation, he said that the EPA had
definitely missed the memo on the intent of the fast
track and, uh, that he also said that,
uh, "You can't use legislation to change an institutional or bureaucratic
culture," he told reporters at parliament, "that has got to come from the top of
the organization and the EPA was going to change." So
I'd like your reflections on that comment and how it,
uh, relates to, uh, both your CEO and
also the role of the EPA in the fast
track, um, system.
Thank you. Um, I was disappointed with Minister Jones's
comments and I wrote to Minister Jones with my
concerns. That letter was, uh,
released, uh, by Minister Jones to the media.
So I assume you've seen it. Um, and I offered in that
letter to meet with Minister Jones to explain
the role of the EPA
and the fact that the EPA has met all the
deadlines, uh, required of it under the fast track
legislation. Um, and during that meeting, um,
he also, uh, and with our minister, we discussed the
opportunities operationally to improve the work that
we do, um, which was very constructive and very
positive. So, um, the, um,
announcement of Alan's resignation
unfortunately occurred on the same day as
the, uh, Minister Bishop and Minister Jones announced
the, uh, fast track amendment bill, um,
being put into the house. And so there was a, a mix,
mixing of, uh, different issues here, which people,
uh, joined, uh, they weren't joined, they, it was just a,
um, circumstances that, um, they both occurred
on the same day. Alan clarified that in a
media, uh, comment that was published, um, that
it was coincidental and, um, that is
absolutely the case.
Um, well, supplementary to that, I, I, I'm not
sure how it can be coinci- coincidental given,
uh, Shane Jones's comments were very specific.
Um, but
my question to you is, um, when he
said that the EPA was going to change, is it your point
from what you've just described that there is no need for that culture in the
EPA to change?
I think, um, all organizations need to
look at whether change is necessary.
As an organization, we have, um, um,
different responsi- roles and responsibilities now from what we've had
previously and potentially more still to come.
So any organization needs to review itself as far
as what we, where we're at and where we need to be in light of
that, uh, additional responsibility or changed
responsibility. And we certainly will be going through that process as
well.
So what, what about the culture in particular would you be focused on then?
Um, so the, the culture of an organization develops over
time. Um, different governments have priorities that
may not always align with the culture of an
organization. And, um, as a board, we will look to
whether the culture of the organization is appropriate, uh, in
light of our responsibility under the legislation and the
additional roles and the responsibilities that a government may give us.
So that will be an ongoing review and assessment as I would expect
all organizations and all boards would do in the situation that
we're in.
Celia.
Thank you. Um, I'd like to take a sup on this that takes
it from the general point about approvals at different
levels. Um, and I'd like to make it specific
about the Suntama Minerals proposal for the Bendigo
Ophir gold mine. Now they've received the
minerals, um, permit for... Then
they...... the EPA declared that the application was
complete. So that would mean that they have done things like the lizard
survey, the, um, risk
analysis of, um, the tailings and so
on. It doesn't mean that you think that those, that the re-
doesn't decide that the project is worthy or not
worthy to succeed. That's up to the panel.
So you just said that they filled in all the forms, done all the
homework, but whether it's a pass or not is up to
the panel. Is that, could you enlarge on the different roles there
to clarify for people
Th- that's correct. Yeah, that's correct.
We have a set of checklists we have to go through, uh, in terms of the
application. We form no view of the application.
It's, does it have the requirements, uh,
required under the Fast-Track Act?
If the, if everything gets ticked, then w- we deem it
complete. If there's information gaps, uh, or
if local authorities have raised issues that have not been
clarified with the applicant, then that could result in incompleteness
as well. And then it's totally up to the panel to make the, the
m- this, the decision.
The go/no-go.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Uh, well, and do all the analysis and the, yeah.
Um, Rachel has a question.
Yeah, yes-
Supplementary.
... and, and I expect, um, you've already given the answer there from
Alan, and I'm just not sure how, um,
uh, the culture of a place is relevant if the
EPA is not the decision-maker. The EPA is doing a whole
set of, uh, specified administrative tasks.
So the EPA has various roles. In some circumstances, it
is the decision-maker, such as under the hazardous
I'm just looking at the Fast Track, only the Fast Track.
Yes. So we are one organization, um, so we have
multiple activities under the
Right, and that was what your answer was about before.
W- well, then thinking specifically about the Fast Track process only, which I
know is difficult 'cause you're saying it's one organization, but is the,
does, wh- what would a ch- how could a change in
culture affect, um, basic
administrative tasks?
So as chair, my, um-
Or complicate it? Yes.
... assessment of, uh, the EPA when it comes to Fast Track
is we've done an incredible job in preparing
for the, um, implementation of Fast Track, and then
standing it up as far as doing a completeness check and
supporting the, um, conveners and panels.
Um, so, um, I, and that was the nature of my
discussion with Minister Jones.
Mm-hmm.
That I believe in Fast Track. We've, we've met, uh, the
government's, uh, expectations and some.
Yeah, so no change in culture needed?
I don't believe so.
Right, thank you.
Mm-hmm. So just on that, just a supplementary.
Um, with the, whe- when you have your, um, I suppose, communication with the
applicants, and, uh, obviously you've got 90 panels going at the moment,
um, what is the feedback that you're getting from the applicants in terms
of the process given, you know, obviously you've set it up
well. It seems to be running well. You've got cost recovery going
on. It's, um, it's a good system, but
obviously,
do the applicants-
I- ... think the same?
Yeah, I'm sure whatever I say, there'll be one applicant who, who will disagree.
Um, I, I would, in terms of the substantive applications,
when they're with us, we get very good feedback from, from the
applicants. Uh, we get amazing feedback from the panels.
I was just in talking to a panel prior to coming here, uh,
and wh- they were, uh, sharing about the great support they're getting
from the EPA's staff. Uh, I, I think that
as in any process, uh,
keeping applicants aware of where we are up to, it's such a short process
anyway. Uh, often where the
tension occurs, uh, Madam Chair, is around
the point at which we might deem something incomplete 'cause it, we've only got
15 days. And we're often pushing very hard to
get a view about the application, and it's,
um, more often than not, much to our regret, it's in the last few days that we
may form a view that the application's incomplete in a material
way, not in an insignificant way that they can fix.
So there's a little bit of tension and feedback about that on
occasion. Uh, but I think the staff are working very hard.
The contact center, um, is getting fantastic
feedback. Uh,
there is some, uh, we- we're not responsible for the referral side.
That, you, you'd need to talk to MFE about their, um, feedback from their
customers. Uh, but from our side, on the substantive listing side,
I- I'm pretty confident where we sit, but I'm sure there could be someone who may
hear this and say, "That's, you know, I have a problem." Yeah.
I- if I could, uh, just add, there's, there was a few areas that you would expect
with a new process like this that were a little bit clunky, that,
uh, the amendment to the act, uh, is
aiming to address to make the process for the applicant
easier and clearer. So, um, that should
help in, in some of those situations, I believe.
Mm-hmm. Well, good, good. Um, Deborah has a supplementary.
Thank you. It, it follows on a little bit from that question which related, that
comment is related to it because, um, the EPA itself is not
forming judgments on the, whether or not the project should
go ahead. But obviously, it is making a judgment as to how
complete the information is. I guess an assessment as
to how, forgive me for putting it this way 'cause I'm sure your judgment is good,
(laughs) how good your judgment is as to the extent to which the panels are coming
back to you for further information.
Um, as I get also from an applicant's point of view, if they feel as though you're
asking for information that the panel doesn't need as well, there's a, there's a
two-way.
Yeah.
Do you have any sense of how that's going?
Yeah. It's, it's, it's a good question. I think we're-... we've got it about right.
Mm-hmm.
Um, someone will throw some at- something at me from behind (laughs) if I haven't.
Uh, uh, uh, it's been a little bit of, um...
One of the, um,
mechanisms that alleviates that is, uh, the ch-
chief panel convener has, um, implemented a
pre... I- I'm not quite sure of the terminology, pre-panel
conference with all the parties. So, uh, before
the panel actually sits down, they'll have nutted out whether there are
significant areas of information gaps or others, or areas of
tension that will have to be covered.
But I think overall, we've pretty much fulfilled our role.
Uh, and if we've got feedback, um, I don't think we
have. Richard, have we had feedback?
Have we had from any panels where, where, um,
have-
No.
... we would deem something complete and we've missed out?
Uh, just need to confirm.
Feel- feel free-
We can come to
the table. ... to disagree with me by the way.
No. They'll have to fully develop it.
I apologize for not being able to answer in fulsome, but, uh, Richard's the
man sitting on the floor.
Uh, no, no, the- the short answer is, is no we haven't received any
feedback to date, uh, from panels, uh, that, uh, we
have allowed applications to come through the system we should have had.
Uh, and we continue to receive, uh, fantastic feedback from panels,
uh, about the support that we provide them with.
Mm-hmm. Yeah.
So- so I mean, there's two possible areas.
One is too much information and one is too little.
Yeah.
I mean, maybe there's
I don't think we fare too much 15 days. We don't have a lot of time.
(laughs)
Oh, okay. Um, but it might be, um, useful at some stage to get some formal feedback
from the panels on just where they're at.
Yeah, we'd expect to be doing that.
Yeah.
Yeah. Uh, we would. Thank you.
And Lan had a question.
Yeah, go on. Thank
you, Lan. Thank you. Um-
Not what panels you want.
I actually wanted to return to some comments that you made the last time you
appeared in front of us. And it was when Fast Track
was, I guess, in its infancy, and it was about the, you
commented about essentially the international reputation of
New Zealand's EPA in relation to our partners around the
world. And you mentioned
essentially a bit of a, um,
yeah, I guess, reputation issue where you described EPAs around
the world sort of questioning why such a
development-focused bill would actually be
held and administered by an
EPA. How has that view changed and
evolved over the year as the process has gone on?
And how do you expect it to shift with this
new changes that have- are- are proposed by the government?
Um, yeah, that's that. Those comments got me in a little bit of
trouble, um-
(laughs) ... when I stood in that, uh, last time around.
Um,
my opinion hasn't changed. Uh, it's very unusual for an environmental
protection authority, uh,
to have this type of model, although I must say there's-
Lan, come in. Sorry.
Um...
We've got some visitors.
Oh, cool.
They come from Porotī School near Whangarei.
Oh, nice.
Oh, very cool.
Experiencing democracy in action.
(laughs)
Hi, how are you? Brilliant, oh-
Hi.
... welcome to the students and teachers.
That's so cool. Um, uh-
They'll break up our very long table.
(laughs) I- I bet. I- I bet.
Oh, wow. Oh, wow, we've got, um-
Yeah.
... quite the team coming in. Brilliant.
Like to just carry on?
Yeah, let's carry
on. Arlene,
if you like? Yes, certainly.
Okay, thank you. Um,
they're- they're certainly in a couple of states in Australia they're loo- are
looking at, uh, something that looks a little similar.
Whether they'll fit within the state EPAs is, uh, I'm not
sure. But the reason
nowhere in our legislation is there, um,
you know, the capacity for this type of process, except the reason
we were asked to undertake it is we're very good at running decision-making panels.
We've- we've done it for, um, you know, 10 years now in
nationally significant projects, boards of inquiry, our hazardous
substance committees. This- this is just something we
do. Uh, and when I- I thank the previous Minister for
Environment for giving us Fast Track, um, Minister
Parker-
Sure. (laughs)
... he did note that we were very good at running decision-making panels, and
that's why he thought that would be the best to do.
Uh, I- I think we've done everything- everything we can to separate
out, um,
the prime focus of the EPA on environmental protection and the
regulation from Fast Track with the brand.
Uh, my Australian colleagues are sickling down and they're ribbing,
uh, uh, at every meeting a- about what we're doing.
But there is, there is occasionally I get a question
about, "Why did you make that decision?" You've got to go back and say, "It wasn't
us who made that decision, that's a separate process." So,
um, I- I- I think these things are always
trade-offs and clearly for, uh, the government of the day, it was weird to see
this function, um, uh, fessed up. We had that
skill base, and I think we've proven we're very good at doing it.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, and, um, despite comments, uh,
made by various parties, uh, I would challenge any,
any of our government agencies to try and match us on the performance that we've
pulled through on the Fast Track team, uh, in the last six to eight
months. So, um, yeah.
Mm-hmm.
It- it's- it's not usual for an EPA, but it's-
it's, you could say it's innovative and groundbreaking on the other hand.
Mm-hmm. So you mentioned within that response the
importance of the EPA running that very,
uh, cohesive and comprehensive
process of actually appointing panel
members. What has-
We don't appoint them, the convener does, sorry, yeah.
Sorry, sorry, the conveners do.
Yeah.
So you hold the process.
We just, we provide the secretarial, all the support for the panel members,
yeah.
What-
What should the committee understand in terms
of the integrity of your role with
it? Because we heard particularly from the fast track panel
conveners themselves as part of the fast track amendment bill,
they flagged some really concerning aspects around, uh, them
talking to either current sitting chairs or potential sitting
chairs, and they flagged their own
personal potential reputational damage by even
sitting on fast track panel
boards. Uh, sorry, sorry, panels, I should say.
Um, how can h- what can you offer the
committee to ensure that we are helping the EPA
maintain the integrity of that process?
Uh, I- I certainly can't speak on
behalf of the conveners or- or panel members.
What- what I can do is assure this committee
that the integrity of the system that supports the
panels is, um, superb. Uh, the
work with the panel conveners, uh, is very
good. Um,
the complexities of putting panels together, which sits with the three panel
conveners, uh, we get very little insight
to. Uh, occasionally we have a discussion with them and,
uh, we hear a bit of s- um, information anecdotally, such as you've
suggested.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, but, um, p- currently, we've got 19 panels
running, as far as I'm aware.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, Jane and the team are pulling more panels together.
Um, I've- I've heard there's, um...
My personal view is people self-select, I guess, if they come on the panels.
Uh, or they don't do the process and I'm unsure, uh, what feedback
they get.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
Okay, thank you.
Thank you, and Rachel.
Yes, I did. And for the visitors in the room, we are
talking to the Environmental Protection Authority
in, um,
asking them questions.
Yes.
Uh, so- so my question was also still on the fast track,
and you mentioned the different priorities beforehand of the fast track.
And I would say one of those different priorities is that the overriding of
environmental protections by the purpose clause of that act, which is to
????? projects.
And so given that, how-
how, um, can it align with the EPA's
core purposes?
It's one of those questions that can get you in trouble.
The protection. (laughs) Aye.
(laughs) I think that's why I said last time, which was a
comment that did get some comment that's an uncomfortable fit.
Um, and- and I don't think I would resile from
that comment. The best that can be done is separating
off that business from the EPA's core.
What
And it's because of that environmental protection?
Well, it's- it's because we're a regulator.
We regulate both for environmental protection and for activities of
humans, uh, when they don't keep to the legislation.
So we're set within our legislative context.
Um, and that balance between, uh,
economic growth and protection is what parliament and government and
others said- said. And we're- we're the,
um, uh, we're- we're beholden to that and to that
legislation, as you know.
Okay. It's a great name, environmental protection.
It's a great name, environmental protection.
I've always loved it. (laughs) And if I can just add-
Another question on fast track? Yeah. So, Lahn has got another question.
Uh, can Barry answer it then?
Oh, thank you. Just, did you- you wanted to add, Barry?
Oh, just- just to add, I mentioned in my introductory comments, uh, chair,
Simon Uptons, uh, uh, w- who, um, wrote a paper
on the, um, marriage of convenience and inconvenience between
economics and environment. And, um, I thought that was a very
good, um, assessment of the challenge as a country
and as an organization that we're face first on, uh, in this
area. Um, thank you.
Lahn.
Uh, there's been quite public commentary around fast track,
particularly with this last fast track amendment
approvals amendment act, um, that we've just finished
deliberating on today. So just for complete
assurance, I would like to hear an answer
to, has there been any ministerial interference in the
administration of the Fast Track Approvals Act?
Oh my God. Gee.
Um, so I'll- I'll make a comment here.
Um, so, um, and I r- thought this question was coming
along, so I sort of, uh, prepared a- a short
statement.
Nice.
So, um, it's well known there are a range of views publicly
about our work as an environmental regulator.
Sometimes these views may be expressed publicly, sometimes
less so. I acknowledge the importance of maintaining our
communications with ministers and with MFE, that's our
monitoring department, but I can assure the committee that
I and the board are very conscious of the boundaries that exist in
Crown entity governments, and also our statutory
independence as a regulator. Being
independent, of course, doesn't mean that we shut ourselves off
and talk to no one.
Mm-hmm.
It means that we are open to hearing views, but
that we make our own decisions and are seen
as an understood to be independent as the law
requires.
Mm-hmm. Thank you. And so,
could you describe then whether you have had any direct
directions or imitations, in-
intimations, I should say-
Intimations.
... from ministers-
And, yeah.
... that could be seen to attempt to influence any
outcomes?
All right. I will read you another one.
(laughs)
If that's all right,
Madam
Chair. (laughs) (laughs)
So as board chair, I have regular interactions with the Minister on a range of
matters. And as members are aware, board members, we
have, um, collective and individual duties to ministers under the
Crown Entities Act. The Minister also has a legitimate
interest in any Crown entity and its work.
There are a range of conventions and practices around this,
and, um, including the statutory procedures around
ministerial involvement in our statement of intent, as well as
letters of expectation and the application of
no surprise convention. All this
reflect that ministers have a legitimate interest in what's going
on in the organization. And the same applies to
MFE as a monitoring department. We also have
responsibilities under the Public Service Code of Conduct
and the interface between board and ministers sits with me as
chair, and it certainly wouldn't be appro- in- appropriate for
me to breach the confidence that exists around these communications.
Mm-hmm.
And if I were to do so, it would have a concerning effect across the whole
Crown entity sector. So may I respectively,
respectively suggest that your question is better
directed to the Minister and or MFE.
Thank you. Appreciate
that. Oh, and it'd be great if the Minister showed up at annual reviews.
Um, look, I think, uh, we're going to finish on fast track now unless,
uh, any members have any further burning questions.
Okay-
Sorry.
Lan, you've got a last question. Yes?
Um, so I did want to ask about
the government policy statements
that, as we understand it, will
be able to be written and influence in
some way-
Respectfully Chair, we are going, we have, this is an annual review-
Yes, it is an annual review.
... about the current issues that are before Parliament, so-
Mm-hmm. That's right. It's actually in the standing orders, Ryan, that you can ask
about current operations. So ..........................
Maybe rephrase your question to kind of potentially
highlight, um, the issue that you would like to address within the annual
review, Lan.
Forward planning too.
How would the government policy statements
proposed in the Fast Track Amendment Bill impact the fast track
process that the EPA is administrating?
I don't know.
We don't know. We're, we're trying to gain clarification.
Well, we hope we'll get clarification in regard to ministerial,
uh, policy statements or direction.
Okay. Do you have any concern about the fact that these could
be applied to processes already in
train?
In train?
Yeah.
Uh, I'm, I'm not sure if it can be in train or whether it's in
future. Sorry, it's outside my, um,
w- where,
we'll see where the amendments, uh, arrive at.
But I imagine given the transparency and, uh, debate around them,
uh, and given the model of an independent regulator, I, I'm
sure, uh, there'll be, uh, checks and balances put
in place around that.
So at the moment, we don't know. We simply don't know what that will look
like, uh, uh, in reality and in practice.
Okay. Thank you.
Look, thank you. So we're now going to move on to another
topic, um, in the area of the regulation of gene
technologies, which I understand we've got a few, uh, questions from
members, uh, around, uh, this area of your work.
So, uh, or potential. Um, so we'll go to Rachel
Brooking.
Yes, thank you. So interested, um, again, in legislation
that's been, um, under development during this sort of term of the annual
review. Um, and that
Gen Tech bill excludes an explicit purpose statement
protecting human and environmental health.
Uh, do you think that, that New Zealanders would expect such a
statement? And would that also go well with, um,
your role as the Environmental Protection Authority that we were just discussing?
Yeah. I, I'm not sure it's in my mandate or our mandate actually to
comment on that, given the development of that legislation was independent of the
EPA.
Um, and at one stage, we were not anticipating that we would
be holding the responsibility for that unit.
You weren't?
No, not-
At this stage?
Not, not in the early days, um, of
the policy development of statements made by a variety of
ministers. Um, and
the degree that EPA has had input into the framework has
simply been advice sought by our key scientists.
Um-
And that's all? Uh, so, so no advice, um, from
you on, on, say, treaty impact?
Uh, no, not on this. But our, our advice has been
largely down to about, at least one or two of our key
geneticists who have been giving very technical advice around the nature of
the risk framework and the way that comes together, as I understand
it, in giving advice to the select committee, I believe.
And any advice on, um, Taonga species or anything?
Uh-
Yet?
Not that I'm aware of.
It
might, it might- I think that's been done by MB... Um, I mean, clearly that's all been worked
through by the committee at stage, but we've been quite separate to that.
Our, um, activity at the moment is setting the unit up,
um, uh, both in terms of developing the portal, the computer systems,
the processes, uh, and we're waiting to find what
the final piece of the legislation-
Sure.
... will look like, yeah.
And, and, and so just, my last-
It's worth noting the regulator is independent of the EPA.
Um, I'm responsible, and the board is, for feeding and watering.
Uh, but they are a totally independent decision maker.
Mm-hmm. Okay. And just the, the final question on things that you didn't give
advice on, so you wouldn't have given advice on trade either, if you were just
giving-
No,
no. ... advice on science?
No.
Okay, thank you.
Uh, Deborah.
So, um, I just want to, um, clarify because that legislation is stalled
at the moment.
So I'm presuming that you're stalling your work on it as well, in terms of getting
set up, ready to have that unit with a new, with a new organization.
Yeah. We have, uh, modified,
uh, the work we ... We've got a number of
streams obviously-
Sure.
... underway. W- The stream that we've paused is any hiring.
We've stopped that-
Gotcha.
... obviously.
Yeah.
Uh, but we're continuing to move forward with, um,
developing the portal and some of the, uh,
case management systems, 'cause that will be useful in any case.
Mm-hmm. Right.
Um, and so it's not wasted investment at
all. We've developed about, um, I'm not...
I'll, I'll get the number wrong, but we've developed quite a number of business
processes. Um, you do end-to-end development of business process for
decision-making, so we've done those within the current framework.
Uh, we will have to wait, but we have slowed
down everything else.
Yeah.
So we'll have to wait for final decisions are made. Yeah.
Okay, thank you.
Yeah.
And, Lan, you had a question?
Just a-
Thank you.
... supplementary on that. What are
any expectations that you have about the timing?
I mean, clearly, is it completely wait and see
or is there any anticipation or information
about it?
We have inquired of... MBIE is directing the
project, so we're on the operational stand-up end of that.
Mm-hmm.
Um, we've been told to continue progressing the establishment of the
unit. Um, uh, we have asked a couple of times, uh,
we've made it clear that we won't progress
hiring of staff clearly, a-and we cannot begin the
search for a regulator because we're unsure the actual
structure, uh, that may come out of the political process.
But we have a name, we have a logo, we have selected
technology partners ready to, to begin.
We've designed 34 processes. Uh, we're working
and continuing on the work of the development of the primary and the secondary
legislation, uh, and we're working on application forms, all the
things that you'd expect us to do.
Right.
But there will be a point at which we will have to stop-
All right.
... uh, unless we get clarification soon.
So, so just on, for example, the tech partners,
they... Is it like contracts that you can essentially
have-
Yes, yeah, yeah. ... just there on hold?
Well, what we've done is, um, for the last, for the last
10 years, we've been progressively, uh, renewing the whole backend
technology of the EPA till today. And we have a very
modern organization in terms of the investment we've made.
Uh, and the core part of that investment is a software called Microsoft
Dynamics that services all our businesses.
So the work we're doing in regard to the gene regulator
is actually, if you like, building a module to manage that.
Okay.
Uh, and indeed we are building a multiple-use module that we
hope to be able to use in our hazardous substance area as well.
Mm-hmm.
So, um, I can assure the committee there's no, uh,
wasted
investment.
Mm-hmm.
And, and th- we... Every week we...
or maybe every two weeks, we review, have we, uh,
received any outdated information from MBIE? Should we continue?
Should we pause the expenditure? And I think what we have, we've taken a very
pragmatic and sensible approach.
And if I can just add-
Mm-hmm.
Alan and I were going to meet with Minister Rea- Reti, um,
before the bill, um, seemed to be stalled, just to
clarify, uh-
Mm-hmm.
... Minister's expectations for the EPA.
That meeting hasn't proceeded. In the new year, we will reconsider
whether we need to, um, have a conversation or not with Minister Reti
regarding our role and his expectations. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, look, if no members have any further questions-
Can I
just ask one more- You've got one more on the gene technology.
Just quickly.
Yes. Okay.
Before the break.
Yeah.
Don't worry. (laughs) Over there. Um, yes.
So this, this, this work that you are sort of still
doing, does... And, and the past work, does it involve
talking, um, internationally with other regulators about
their set-ups or
not?
Um,
a point of clarification, by the way. The funding is...
We're not using EPA appropriation for this.
This has been separately funded through MBIE.
Okay.
That's one point. Um, the whole, the whole, uh,
framework and scheme is based on the Australian-
Yeah.
... gene regulator model.
But, but-
MBIE have been at the front end of, um, uh, that
conversation, but, uh, we're well-known to the Australian regulator.
We, and our scientists, uh, work with them anyway, so,
um, you know, it's a very close association between us, uh, particularly at
the scientist level, our, our principal scientists is.
And are they... Uh, is the regulator standalone or is it-
Yes, yes, it is standalone. It does have, uh...
There are, um, a couple of hooks back to, uh, ministry and to the
minister, but, um, pretty much standalone.
Uh, one person is the, um, uh, decision-making, but
it's the same model.
Thank you.
Look, uh, we are going to take a 10-minute break.
Um, and when we return, uh, we're going to cover the hazardous
substances processes. Um-
Okay.
So we will come back to that at 20 past 4.
Uh, so we will see you
then.Um,
so, uh, we are back, uh, for the annual review with the
Environmental Protection Authority.
Um, and we're going to move on to the area, um, of
hazardous substances application processing.
Obviously, this is a big part of your work as well.
Um, so I might actually just kick off with the first, uh, question around
this, um, given I'm from Hawke's Bay
and, uh, large horticulture sector, fruit bowl of
New Zealand, um (laughs) -
(laughs)
... and, uh, you know, I do have a lot of growers that, uh, get
quite frustrated at times, uh, around the, the
process, um, of approvals and how long it
takes, um, in New Zealand to get some of these, um,
products into New Zealand, uh, where other countries
obviously have the product. And I suppose if I gave an example, uh,
Rapsody, which was great to see that approved earlier this year,
meaning that, um, you know, we can look at, uh, reducing the black spot and
getting those apple exports out to, uh, China and Asia and a lot of
those countries. So, uh, economically, it's quite
significant, um, this approval process for our
horticulture sector, for our agriculture sector, uh, for our economy.
Um, how are you going with your processes?
So maybe I'll make a few introductory comments and then hand over to Ad-
Alan. Um,
so, um, I, I, um, accept
that, um, we, um, had struggled
with processing as a result of, um,
insufficient resourcing, um, and, uh,
also, uh, uh, during COVID, uh, resulted in,
uh, a, a, um, extension or an increase in the
queue of, uh, products needed to be assessed.
Um, we've had, uh, reviews done of the
situation. Uh, SAPIRA was one of them, did a review,
and that found that while our, um, performance was
comparable, we, they compared us to international reg- similar
regulators. And while they saw our performance was
similar, once we started the process, our
resourcing was very inadequate compared
to the other countries. Um, so we were
well below the resourcing level. Um, in, in
the time they did that review, uh, resourcing was 7%
of what Australia spends on, um, hazardous
substances, uh, assessments. So well below
what, uh, is happening overseas. Um, so a number of
things have happened since that report, uh, was
done. Um-Firstly, um, we've, um, had
the, um, ministerial review undertaken, uh, and its
16 recommendations which we have welcomed.
Mm-hmm.
And we have, uh, put in place a number of
different, um, actions and activities as a result
of that, uh, review. Um,
leading into a regulatory change, the
omnibus bill for the HSNO Act, which is in the process
of being drafted, as I made in my introductory comments-
Mm-hmm.
... which I think will be a significant game-changer in this
area. In addition, we have increased the resourcing in that
are- in this area, and that resourcing, um, has
now increased an- another 13, uh, people, a new
team. Um, so we're already starting to
see a reduction in time, uh, that
the, uh, process is taking and an increase in the
number of assessments that has been undertaken,
which, uh, we, uh, absolutely welcome.
Um, so, um, there's a number of actions that we
see, um, are still needed, namely from the
omnibus bill, such as being able to give, uh,
conditional approval. Um, conditional approval would enable
products that haven't been assessed, if they have been assessed overseas
by a trusted regulator, to be used in New Zealand by
growers and farmers until the assessment is
completed. And we must remember, in New
Zealand, when we approve something,
it's not time-bound like overseas
regulators often do. It's open-ended, and the only
way that we can change that is to do a
reassessment, which is not often appreciated
by, uh, industry, and takes time
and takes, uh, resources. Um, so we
need to get it right at the start, and that's our focus, on
getting it right. And I've, as chair, been very pleased
with the work that Alan and Lauren, who heads up the
team now that Chris Hill has retired, um,
and the progress that has been made and what we've got, uh, in
train in this area at the moment.
Mm-hmm. So since the review, uh,
obviously you feel you've made progress.
What, uh, how many, uh, say category C and
category B, uh, products have you,
uh, approved since the review?
Oh, and sorry, just before you... Can I just do a clarification on that point?
Just a little one that... 'Cause we're talking about hazardous substances here,
but, uh, just checking, and sorry I wasn't necessarily
listening to you with full attention, Barry, just briefly.
Um, the review was on the, the agricultural
and horticultural products, not-
Correct.
... not the wider hazardous-
Correct. Apologies.
Oh, wait, so-
Yes.
So at the moment, we're just talking about that-
Yeah.
... those in that review.
But my, and my question was to-
Yes,
... horticulture and agricultural products.
That's what I understood the question to be.
No, no, that's right. That, that it was, uh...
And so I'm just interested to know, since the review-
Oh,
I can do- ... how many have been approved.
A- a- actually, um, t- just, uh, to, to clarify the point, only
56% of the applications in the queue are ag hort.
The rest are all commercial-
Right.
... industrial uses. So it, it does pay to remember that when we do
these omnibus things, we're affecting everyone, not just ag hort.
Um, we started work, we actually appointed, started to put
the, um, new team in place and the work, uh, that we were
doing through SOPERA prior to the review.
Uh, look, um, I think the new team was certainly after the
review, but we, we knew we had to make quite a lot of effort.
So the, the gross numbers, I'll come down to the, the numbers you're
after. We started the financial, last financial year with
121 applications in the queue. We're now down to 87.
Um, uh, in the '24/'25 year,
we processed 62 applications, which is the highest we've ever
done, um, for many, many years. In fact, probably the
highest we've ever done. Um, of those, um,
49 were rapid, so they're very easy to do.
We, we know what the, the active is.
Um, eight, eight were Cat A. Uh, for those,
um, in the room who don't know, three were Cat B.
These are ones we've seen the active before and they're in various different
combinations and we're able to push those, those through the
system, uh, with- without a lo- necessarily a lot of
work. But the ones where we take two to three years, so
what's called Cat C, so they're new actives, they're new chemicals we haven't seen
before. They may or may not have been approved overseas,
uh, not always. Um, but generally they
have, um, been looked at overseas and may have
approvals. Uh, but those approvals may be for very
different use. They may be for broad acre in Europe, uh, and
not for the type of use we'd use here.
Uh, and the
regulatory system elsewhere, New Zealand is very unique in having a
regulatory system that looks at hazards around aquatic environment and
around invertebrate terrestrial animals.
We're worried about worms, insects, uh, as well.
So it takes us about two to three years.
We've done two Cat Cs in '24/'25.
Uh, we have two... um, I'm just w- looking through my
notes. We can give you this information in writing to make sure we can be
absolutely accurate. Um, but we
have, uh, Cat Cs pending, uh, as well.
Since July, we've decided 31 application, two of those have been
Cat Cs. So the big progress comes in the
simple, in the more simple-
Mm-hmm.
... um, applications, uh, where we can get those through
without doing quantitative analysis using the
ecotoxicologists. So the real engine room in the
organization on hazardous substances, uh, and I'm not taking
anything away from the other advisors who do the work, it's the
ecotoxicologists. And we don't make any of those here.So
the- Sorry, the what? The what?
Eco, ecotox ecologists-
Oh. ... we don't make those here in New Zealand.
Mm-hmm.
Most of ours, in fact, all of those, except for maybe Eugene, uh,
who is Kiwi?
Australian.
Um, Australian?
(laughs)
Yeah.
Close, uh, we import. We have to go around the world and find them and
convince them to come and work here.
And that's what happened after COVID. We lost them.
They all went home-
(laughs)
... once the borders opened up, and that just shut down the production
line. Um, so we're, we're very, um...
The queue's down 10.5, 10.4% since July
'25. Um,
in the queue now, there's 25 substances.
Is that of CAT C-
Mm-hmm.
... or is it in general?
That's in general-
Yeah.
... the whole queue,
Yeah, because I think it's quite interesting for you to make that clarification
because I suppose the, the CAT C-
Mm-hmm.
... is obviously where a lot of the, the growers and the farmers and, you know-
Correct, yeah.
They want, they want to see the progress.
And so-
Yeah.
Um, and there's two that have obviously gone through, run the 24/25 there.
Yeah. I'll ask Lauren.
So I suppose it's, um, you know, there's the quantity side of it, which is great.
You're getting through the easy stuff and trying to move that.
But sometimes, um, yeah, the, the bigger, more complex,
which obviously could have a hugely economic benefit to
the economy that, uh, is taking, um, I think
some, in some cases, four or five years.
No, no.
Or the, I think the Rapsody took, um-
It might be,
but it takes longer. ... '21 it started, and then it, um, got approved in July
'25.
It would be one of
the longest. Mm-hmm. So that's, what's that? Four and a half years?
Yeah, yeah.
And, and then in other countries, it's obviously moved through a lot faster?
No.
For sure. Sure.
Not necessarily. Other countries can be five to 10 years for their approvals.
Mm-hmm. Yeah.
Um, so there's a lot
of general statements made based on a couple of specifics, uh,
around, uh, hazardous substance regulation
worldwide. Uh, the SAPERA report showed that we're very good when
we get an application into the system and lodge it.
Where within every other regulator around the world, our problem has been
the queue. And when you have a CAT C, this is a new chemical.
Uh, in the old days, uh, in the IRMA days, you might
have a few hundred pages of documents to look at.
Now it's thousands-
Mm-hmm.
... um, to be looked at. Uh, but I don't know if you want to
comment on CAT Cs and what we've managed to do and what you're thinking about doing
in that area.
Sure. Thanks, Helen. One thing that's important to remember with the new active
ingredient assessments is that the year in which
a decision is finally made doesn't necessarily reflect the years in which the
effort and the work of the assessment has been made.
So while the applications that take a shorter amount of
time, we see that change becoming evident more
quickly. So after the review, we put in more resource, and we're
already seeing an uptick in some of those simpler
applications. With the applications that naturally take in the
time span of years, there is going to be that lag.
So yes, we have, uh, decided another two since July, one in
July. We released another, um, herbicide CAT C this
week. We've got about
a dozen, uh, CAT Bs and CAT Cs that are in various stages.
That's just not evident to everyone yet because they haven't reached that point of
the ap- you know, the assessment process that we're either consulting on them or
progressing them to a decision. So it, it really is just the difference in
complexity between different applications-
Mm-hmm.
... meaning there's going to be that time differential between the
impact and the improvement to then when actually people see it come out the
other end.
Okay. No, no. That's great to hear that there is some progress going on and
obviously-
No, thank
you. ... things are getting faster and more efficient.
And, uh, so thank you. Look, we've got a couple of supplementaries on this-
I've, I've got a primary before-
... this, this, uh, area. So, uh, we'll go to Rachel and then
Celia.
Okay. Thank you, thank you. And, uh, so sticking with the
agricultural and horti- horticultural products,
um, can you describe to
us the, um, the relevance of New Zealand being a
different... having different ecosystems
than the rest of the world, given that we're an island far
away from everywhere else, and these international eco
toxicologists.
Toxicologists.
It's quite a hard word to say.
It's a very hard word.
(laughs)
Well, call, call them ecotox.
Okay. The ecotox, (laughs) who, who you are having to
import. Does, um... How much does New Zealand having
an unusual ecologies, uh, add to
the work of the assessment compared with other
countries? And when we're saying, well, we want to, we want to take the
learnings from other countries, which makes total sense-
Mm-hmm.
... and use those, how much extra work, um, is required because of
New Zealand's environment not having naturally occurring
apple trees or, and-
Yeah. ... the invertebrates that you're worried about?
I'll, I'll answer, then Lauren will, will point out where I get it all wrong.
(laughs)
Uh, we're a very different top- uh,
topological country with waterways,
mountains, different soils. We don't do massive,
massive broad acre, um, farming. Uh, we have a whole different
mix, and we have tons of species we have to worry about.
Uh, the, the complication is not only
in, uh, the, the assessment that the scientists have
to do. This is why the ecotox models are so important, is they
have to work out, um, from all the studies around the world and all the
information that we have in New Zealand, what they call the endpoint.
What is the endpoint concentration of that chemical that will,
can be tolerated in the environment?
Uh, and that endpoint will have worked all the way back through from
the spraying, spray nozzle size, the droplet size.
Uh, is that endpoint okay on the terrestrial environment?
Is it okay in the aquatic environment?
And then you have very vulnerable species, some birds, uh, particularly
invertebrates. You have to run models for all of
those, uh, animals. So-... huge amount of work with the New
Zealand environment, uh, very unusual to be able to pick
up, uh, and Lauren may correct me, but pick up an assessment done
overseas and say, "Look, that fits perfectly, uh, we- we can just go with
that." Because we then have to go back and calculate the buffer zones,
um, how much buffer should we ask an applicator to
be doing staying away from a river or a lake or a human
habitation. Do you want, Lauren, do you want to add the really expert stuff?
(laughs)
That's my amateur, your vote.
No, thank you, Alan. Uh, I guess one thing, just to point out, is a lot of
these products are obviously developed overseas for large markets.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
Uh, New Zealand obviously is a big agriculture and horticultural
nation.
It is a big part of our economy. But when we look at the scale of even our
largest ag import, um, commodities, they are
very small on a global scale. So a lot of these products are developed
for things like cotton-
Mm-hmm.
... soy, rice, bananas, things that we
don't grow a whole lot of. So
while there, while we do rely on
information that has been assessed by these other regulators, we have to determine
the relevance of it to what is the proposed use in New Zealand.
So it's not just a case of saying, "Oh, they found it okay in the US
to use in the Midwest, therefore we can bring it into Canterbury and
use it in the same way." So the- the other things of distilling down, how is it
actually going to be used in New Zealand?
And as Barry said, once we do approve something, it doesn't have a 10 or
15 year automatic right of renewal, which is what most, uh,
international jurisdictions have, where it goes through that automatic process of
reassessment. We would have to specifically go back and look at it.
So it is important that the... and, and then that's even before you layer
on things like total species or the unique-
Mm-hmm. ... topography and geography and climatology-
Yeah.
... of New Zealand as well.
And have you done many of those reassessments actively, the
EPA?
Uh, we've got a program of reassessments underway, uh, at the
moment. We've pushed through... I don't know if I've got these.
I do have them in front of me somewhere.
Um, we can provide that information to you.
We're actively, we've got a number of, um, uh,
substances under active reassessment now.
And as I've determined, we publish our reassessment list on the website.
Yep.
That's determined also from our, uh, chemical, priority chemical
list.
Yes.
So of the chemicals we're really concerned about, uh... And in fact, here you go.
(laughs) Thank you.
Somebody provided me, uh-
There.
... just like, uh, that, so I can't just say it easily, though,
team. (laughs)
(laughs)
We can, we can manage one or two-
Speak of it.
... major reassessments a year. We'll provide it in writing.
But we, we, th- when I first arrived at the EPA, we didn't have a
reassessment team. We would try and fit them in around everything else.
So we, we now have a dedicated reassessment team,
um, and, uh, you know, it's, it's a precious
resource that we have to really focus on the chemicals we're most concerned
about.
Great, thank you. Thank you. Uh, Celia, that's a supplementary.
Yes, on this, um, going down, um, the issue of
invertebrates in particular a little further, 'cause after
all, the American EPA was,
um, the genesis of the American EPA was really Rachel
Carson's work in Silent Spring. So um, the
connection between invertebrates, birds and EPAs
is historically very strong. Um, it's remarkable it took us
so much longer to have an EPA at all.
But given that most of the
ecotoxicologists, um, are from overseas-
Yes.
... to what extent can they easily
analyze the effect of different chemicals on, I think
we've got about 20,000 different insect species,
90% of which are endemic? Like they don't occur
anywhere else in the world.
Mm-hmm.
And we know that weta are, don't occur anywhere else in the world,
but there are a lot of others and they have intimate
relationships with plants, birds,
other species. So how on earth can you
assess whether a chemical that works fine, as you say, somewhere where they're
spraying large field of cotton, um, would work for us
all?
Be- because the part of teams with other experts and seven experts
in them, uh, and it also takes all that time for them to come up to speed
to understand our environment, uh, yet to go.
Mm-hmm. This is a good question. Thank you, Celia.
Uh, that is part of one of the aspects that we're trying to look at in this models
moni- modernization project, is how do we better incorporate some of
those unique New Zealand considerations?
The flip side to that is, as I was saying, because most of these products are
developed overseas, there is a limitation to how much New
Zealand-specific data we can reasonably expect a global
company to do, um, because we do have to keep some
consistency. So the types of studies and test reports that we require as part of
an application are typically to OECD guidelines.
So that means there is a standardization approach across the globe.
But you're right, the key thing that we do have to consider and then take
into account, um, different information is, is New Zealand's
unique, uh, fauna and flora. And that is a key part of the HAZMA Act to make sure
that that is recognized.
Thank you. Look, we'll go to Grant McCullum now.
Yeah, I've got a, um, a, a number of questions from a, uh, a, a
constituent actually who's a specialist in this area and, and is
working for, for, for people, uh, got a doctorate in this area,
so working, 'cause had done for 20 plus years with your
organization. It would be fair to say, um, is not particularly
happy with the performance and has had consistent issues.
I'll just give you a, a flavor in, for
example, "In the last few years, it becomes increasingly difficult to get help and
advice from the EPA. There is no 800 number but one gets
stonewalled by the person answering the phone.
I've tried to be transferred to a particular person and have not once been
successful." This letter was written on 30th of October.
"I've asked for a call back or an email and it does not happen."So
that's, well, any comment on, on that type of
challenge?
Yeah, I can't comment on this-
Yeah.
... part of that obviously, but that would be disappointing if that was true.
But in general, uh, applicants, um,
we try and provide as, as much help as we can.
It would be true to say that over the last few years we've had
to, uh, readjust the work that we do to
applicants. The New Zealand taxpayer was doing an awful lot of work for chemical
companies-
Yeah.
... uh, and we have pushed back on that, which a- again has made the
industry slightly, um, unco- unhappy about that.
Yeah. The, the, the complaint is, is the fact there's, there's no,
um... that try even to deal has been very difficult.
I, I don't think that's a fair comment but I can't comment on specifics.
Okay. Um, I'll give you another...
an example that, um, is given. They, um...
In 2023, a individual tried to, um...
applied to get two ingredients added to the New Zealand Inventory of Chemicals,
right? And, um, as per the requirements under the act,
and as... and as that, and if you...
and then went to check that these...
received a letter of confirmation that, that these ingredients had been accepted
and will be added to the NZIOC which is, which is an
online database. I... they... I checked in April '25 and
found that it had not been actioned yet
on-
Well, I'll just get that individual if he wants to call me directly.
Yeah.
Um, I'll follow that up but there could be lots of reasons-
And, and then they followed, and they followed it up and, and
Yeah.
... with this and they, because they haven't been able to get the communication
and-
Yeah.
... they've been entirely frustrated that it's something that should have basically
been assured it had been done wasn't done, which meant they were then operating
illegally with some of the products-
Okay, I can assure you we'll follow that up if we can get that...
make sure if that individual's prepared to come to me.
Yeah, okay. No, that's fine because yeah-
Yeah. Yeah.
... I mean, and that's I think, um, a reflection of some of this
frustration that, that the, the sector feels that they at times
aren't getting the service? And-
Um,
yes, I, I can see that. I, I would add with some controversy that we're
not an industry servicing organization as well.
We're a regulator.
Yeah, yeah.
Uh, I, I would add that, and industry has some expectations of us
which, um, don't necessarily recognize our role but if that's
the case, I'm prep- ha- quite happy to follow that up and deal-
Okay. ... with that individual.
Yeah, thank
And follow through what where we've... if we've not been performing.
Okay, thank you.
So just a supplementary to that, what kind of
feedback are you getting from industry?
I mean, you know, Barry used to be in the industry, the horticultural stuff,
how, how are they feeling in terms of, uh, the process?
And obviously you're saying things are starting to happen faster, you are
starting to, you know, streamline, we're kind of starting to see a few more
efficiencies. I mean, what, what feedback are you getting?
So it's, it's a interesting area, um, so I try and get out
and meet with industry leaders especially if there's,
um, a media report that potato growers, say, are not
getting the agrochemicals they need to produce
potatoes and are going out of business.
So I go to the potato growers involved and talk to
them about what's the problem. Mm.
And, um, it seems to be the agrochemical
companies are pushing, um, to
tr- try and obviously get their products approved and are, are,
uh, making statements that at times the industry
involved are not always aware of.
So the potato industry in this case wasn't aware
there was a product that was missing or that they needed a product to
keep in business. Um, so, um,
I'm, I'm about to, um, respond to some of the more
recent media, uh, reporting which I don't believe
was appropriate, um, in the Farming Magazine.
So that'll be out next week. But I certainly am trying to get
around all the industry bodies and, and leaders
and understanding what the issues are.
We want to know what their priorities are, if there's a gap in a product-
Mm.
... we are trying to put in place a prioritization process
whereby if that industry has a real problem and a
need, we can potentially focus our resource
to, um, process that application if there's
one in the system that's going to address that problem.
Um, so we, we... and, um, in
addition, um, the organization that represents
agrochemical, uh, companies, um,
AFANZ, I've been to their board meetings twice
to, uh, listen to their concerns and understand the
issues, um, and will continue to engage,
uh, with them to try and get clarity.
But it's very hard at times, uh, because their
expectation is we'll approve everything tomorrow-
Mm-hmm.
... and we can't do that.
Is that a new thing though in terms of you going along to the meetings with the
industry or has that always happened?
Um, I'm unsure but certainly that's my approach and
style that I want to work with industry and stakeholders to
understand them. Not to interfere with a, um,
assessment of a particular product- Mm. ...
but to understand as an industry what the gaps, the needs are,
and what the interaction issues they have with the EPA.
Just like Grant's raised. Mm. It's the first time I've heard of a
concern with respect to someone getting...
engaging with EPA. That's not something I've heard before and I'm
pleased Alan will be following that up.
It's, it's worth clarifying if industry have a need, they shouldn't come to
us. They should go to the chemical companies.
Mm. But I suppose in
We, we don't... Our responsibility is not to define you need a
chemical.
Our responsibility is to take the chemical and work out whether it should be-
So I suppose the flip side of that though is, um, the R&D and
us wanting to obviously attract some of those internationals-
... to New Zealand because, uh, we need to have our competitive advantage-
Absolutely.
We need to be able to compete-
Mm. ... with, uh, the other countries around the world that have these products to be
able to, uh, you know, sell our products at a premium across the world.
And so, um, if we have a system and I suppose that's, you
know, too restrictive then, um, you know, they won't come here.
So-
There's no queue in R&D, um, at all.
No.
Uh, applications for containment, um, we don't have a queue for.
We push those applications through pretty quickly,
Okay, so- so when I talk to industry, they say, um, not
industry, to AFANZ. They say that our conditions are too hard, so that
R&D's going offshore. But when we check offshore, our conditions are the
same. So I-
You know, it's- it's one of them.
Mm. Okay. No, I mean, I just thought I'd-
But the point is
taken. ... ask that question because obviously it's important.
We've a- and we've talked at length today on the-
Yeah.
... Environment Committee around how important the science is and, uh, and
R&D. And so-
Mm-hmm.
And I just w- wanted to clarify that point.
One, just one final comment, um, does that p- do, do you have a rapid assessment
process as, as well?
Yes, 100%.
How does that work? How is that supposed to cover that?
Uh, Lauren?
Sure. So there are four rapid assessment
processes within the legislation.
Three have been in there for a very long time.
Um, and essentially what they do is they allow for a rapid assessment if something
similar in hazard, similar in risk, um-
Yeah, yeah. ... similar in composition has already been approved, because we don't need to go
back to the start. We- we- we know about it.
Yeah.
There's another, uh, rapid assessment where if something
is hazardous, 'cause obviously-
Yep.
... needs to be hazardous, otherwise it's not regulated by us, but has the lowest
possible hazards of its class-
Yep.
... then it may also be eligible. And then there is a more
newer, uh, rapid assessment pathway, which people may be familiar with,
which is the international rapid...
uh, international regulator rapid pathway.
And that relies on, it has specific criteria that are
written into the legislation that have to be met in order for the EPA
to consider, uh, using that pathway.
And is there... And you... Is there an expected timeline you would put
around these assessments or how do you approach it? Do you...
H- when you relate to your... the- the p- the client, the person coming to you, do
you give them an indication of how long this might take or anything like that?
We would like to. There's- there's statutory timeframes for doing that.
But obviously, there's a lot of work that needs to be gone to make sure that it
meets the criteria-
Yeah.
... to be able to undertake that assessment in 10 days.
And realistically, half of that time is actually getting it through the approval
process, getting the documentation to the decision-maker to make that
decision. And as Barry said, these approvals do last
forever. Just because we've done it under a rapid, it doesn't give it any shorter
approval. It doesn't give it any different status as far as its approval.
It's still going to be approved in perpetuity unless it undergoes a
reassessment. The time it takes upfront before we might be in a
position to actually undertake that rapid assessment is
where the challenge has been, and that is where the queue has been because
there are only so many resources. And while we
would love to be able to triage every application
as it came in over the last few years, that would have required us taking
resource off assessing someone else's application in order
to- to look at things as they come in.
And that's always a tension in a lot of, uh, regulatory processes,
is being able to keep up with that quantum of work.
And- and- and I suppose my last question, um, is it appeared to me that there seems
to be a, um, communication was, um, in
this case, in particular, missing between the person doing the work on
behalf of their clients and- and- and your
organization. There... So that...
So consequently, that appears to be building up frustration.
Well, that- that generally sounds like a consultant, um, who will have-
Right.
... certain expectations to-
Mm-hmm.
... for delivery. Um, I would push back a little and say
our team work directly with APLINZ and particularly with companies who come in
on a regular basis to meet with us, um, to talk about the applications,
what they have in the pipeline. Uh, Chris Hill
has, just before he retired, spent considerable time in Australia talking to
the key companies saying, "What have you got in the pipeline?
What do you want there?" So clearly there is an issue there.
Mm-hmm.
Um, it's certainly true that we do find some individuals acting on
behalf of applicants can, um, have different
expectations. Sorry, but I'm very happy to follow up on that.
And can I just add that the Omnibus Bill in this area-
Yeah.
... will clarify-
... um, time periods and give greater certainty to the
applicants-
Yeah.
... than what is currently the case.
That said, I think that sounds like a crucial-
Mm-hmm. And so just a supplementary on that-
Thanks.
... because you spoke about the queue and obviously that being a problem, a
challenge. Um, and then you said, "Oh, there's actually..." I can't remember the
number you gave, 12 or eight or that are about to be moved through,
but no one would know that because no one understands the queue
The individual applicants wouldn't know that.
Right. Yeah, so where do you... Where do...
I suppose where's the balance in terms of providing some certainty, as you say-
Yeah.
... um, but then, uh, you know, obviously keeping
things at under wraps as much as you need to-
Yeah.
... to- to provide the process?
Well, I don't think it's under wraps.
It's worth noting that a category C, if it's notified, will require a public
hearing-
Mm-hmm.
... and a decision-making committee.
So, you know, there is a set statutory process that has to be followed.
So every applicant that Lauren will refer to will know exactly where
their application is in the queue.
Uh, we can talk generally about the queue.
Uh, we find it best not to talk generally about individual applications.
The chemical companies tend to get a bit ropey about their competitors knowing that
they have something in the system.
Yeah.
Uh-
But there's commercial sensitivity around it.
Yeah, yeah. So-
Yeah.
... you know, there's always that balance as well.
And our quarterly reports have significant amounts of information
and we're very transparent now with respect to the
various, uh-
In fact, they list every assessment underway.
... categories and stuff. Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
But they don't identify the chemical.
Thank you. Look, Celia has got a question.
I'll leave myself on that area. I'm keen to move on to a couple other areas.
Thank you.
Okay. Yes, Jo, you have a primary?
Um, yes. Oh, but it's a different area.
So, um, let me know if you want me to take it a little bit later.
So just, uh, while we're on the... Uh, are you still talking about the hazardous?
No, I'm not.
Now
moving on from- I want to talk about ETS and I want to talk about EEA.
Yeah.
Okay, yeah. So if any further questions at all on the, um, on the
hazard-... does chemicals process? No, we're all good.
Okay.
(laughs)
So we'll move on from that subject area and, uh, we'll hand it over to you Celia
???
Yep, thank you for coming in. (laughs)
Thank you.
Excellent.
Um, it was really about the age of the ETS
register, whether it's fit for purpose.
I know, and this is not really about, um, discussing this government's, um,
climate change proposals or lack of, but it's about how you're
managing the ETS register. Also, um, I'm interested
in the interface with MPI, because MPI sets the
fees but, uh, and h- how those two things work
together.
Okay, so let me take that in, in order.
(clears throat) Um, I think I've, uh, given evidence before in
various committees. The ETS register is now 10, 14 years
old. Um, uh, I, as
registrar, I hold a statutory position, um, have put a
freeze on development of that piece of software.
Uh, and that software, the register is, is stable.
Is it fit for purpose? Um, it's fit for purpose for what it does,
but in terms of, uh, progressing policy and
changes that may want to come through, we cannot make any
changes, uh, that involves changes to the core code.
Uh, so right at the present time, the current minister has received a
number of briefings about options going forward, uh, in terms of a new
register. And in fact, around the world, uh, the Australians are just finished
building theirs, but there's a number underway around the world.
So, uh, I think for maximum flexi- but this, this
register was built under old architecture.
It, it was built as a standalone box.
Uh, you wouldn't build that anymore as that.
Um, so we have been in discussions for three to four years
now with MFE and various ministers about the need for an upgrade or a
rebuild of that whole system. Uh, in terms of MPI,
we, (clears throat) we don't, we do not have the expertise for
forestry. So the board, through the board mechanisms, we
delegate all the responsibilities associated with emissions
to MPI for forestry, uh, and they manage that
independently. Uh, our role is simply to audit and
make sure that the decisions they make under delegation, um,
have been done correctly. Uh, but they have the, uh,
capability to set their own fees, which they have done, and the capability to
run their own operation. That's a very big operation and there's just no way that
we would be able to even contemplate, um, dealing with that.
It's a very complex, uh, part of the
business. Uh, and you know-
Mm-hmm.
... you have pre-1989 forest, you have post, can you claim them,
can't you claim them? Frankly, it makes my head hurt, uh, and I'm,
I'm quite glad-
Makes my head hurt and I've got some ???
I'm quite glad I have other people in the organization that understands the
intricacies of all that.
(laughs)
Um, but our association with MPI is very important, it's very
valued, and we're constantly working with them, uh, as
policy changes and others come through.
But you don't have any money set aside at the moment in this year's
budget to, um, take
the relatively... Would you say it's a relatively urgent
matter to upgrade the register? Or, or is that only
if policy changes?
Well, it, it depends on, um... Software doesn't wear
out, as long as you don't fiddle with it.
Once you start fiddling with it, you're in trouble, uh, which is why I won't let
anyone go to the code.
Difficulties. (laughs)
Um, leave the code up-
I used to be a banking programmer,
Yeah, leave the code alone. It's fine.
(laughs)
Uh, it clearly is not fulfilling the needs of, of this government or
indeed probably the previous government.
Um, and so, uh, to build a new system is
expensive. You would have to fund that independently and separately. Yeah.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Yes.
Thank you. Uh, yeah, I... Just following on from Celia's, which are two quick
subs. One, I just logged into the online service and it was all through the
MPI website.
MPI or EPI?
Uh, yeah, and I was just wondering why was it...
Well, everything's MPI, I'm wondering why it was through EPI, at least on-
EPI or MPI?
Oh, through the Tupu Ake.
Yeah, that's right, because we've delegated the whole function to MPI.
So it's all within... Okay, so just-
So the whole forestry function.
MPI runs on behalf of the EPA.
Yeah, yeah. All right then.
The board has given them all the ???
So would we be asked... So should we ask MPI about funding, um, for
this or ???
No, no, the EPA is in charge of the register.
Okay.
MPI handles all the front end with the forest.
So... All right.
So what they do is provide us information that we put into the register.
And they set their own fees?
And they, this... Yeah.
That's right, yeah. Yeah, they do all their fee structure. Yeah.
Okay, so we should be asking them about that.
And then the second question was, yeah, uh, uh, as you say, the software is
40 years, it'll be paid off. Um, but when you...
With these optional brief- these briefings with options that, uh, ministers could
take advice on, have you put anything around blockchain technology as an option in
there?
Uh, the Aussies had looked at blockchain, uh, we haven't ev- we haven't gotten that
far yet because we're waiting for our in-principle decision.
Do you want to go for a new register?
Because then we'll start looking at a business case.
Doing a business case on that's quite expensive.
All right, so but blockchain technology is not off the table once, if there was to
be ???
No, no. And, but the Australians have used blockchain, don't ask me how they've
used it and what it means.
Sure,
Um, but they have, yeah.
That was a
??? answer.
At that point, my eyes will glaze over and I'll get incoherent, yeah.
?
Um, Deborah Russell has a question.
Yes, I'm just trying to get my head around this.
When you say the fees that are charged by MPI, that's
for-
MPI, yep.
... registering and auditing
forests.
The forest, yeah.
And MPI then would say how many credits were generated, which would be what you
would be loading into your register.
Yes, so they work out, they have to work out the number of trees, the forest
density.
And then there's all the rules about is it pre-1989, post, all
this.
Um, and you said that the current registry, you'd had
conversations with the minister.
Was that the Minister for Climate Change or the Minister for the Environment
and Biodiversity? Um, Minister for Climate Change, Minister Watts.
And, and with previous ministers, I should add as well.
Yeah. So, uh, I am intrigued by this.
Um, uh...
Oh, you're running the register but not the auctions?
No, we don't do the auctions. The auctions are done by-
Oh, so you just run the register?
... MCX here.
Yeah, okay 'cause, um-
Yeah.
So, 'cause I just see that they got a decouple unit prices and volumes from
the, uh, our Paris national stream contribution.
But even- even then, all you would be dealing with is the-
All we do is, we don't even have, we don't even have, um, pricing
information in the register. We just have units.
Wow.
Just have the units? Okay. Let's- let's cool.
Um, I was just saying, you- you mentioned before, um, when we were talking
about, um, Fast Track or something-
... that you have, uh, a software set up that's comparatively easy to build new
stuff in.
Yeah.
But presumably, the register is so different from the other activities you
are engaged. And like, it's not project management or anything like that, is it?
No, you- you could use, uh, you could use Dynamics to run your, um,
uh, customer database.
Right.
But what we have is, we have a box that does everything.
So-
You know, t- 14 years ago when we built the register, the technology was build
your- your box. No, you learned on the cloud, you went doing any of that.
Yeah.
Today, you would do what would be called distributed architecture.
You'd have a-
Yeah.
You'd have
a- a customer database, you'd have your, uh, calculation machine over here and
you'd have that. So, there is a possibility that that's why we
chose Dynamics as well, that you could use part of
Dynamics, um, to run that, the customer database.
But you couldn't use it to do all the unit stuff.
Yeah. Right. Um, and in terms of all those units that are sitting
in the register, are you able to age them and things like
that?
Uh, no, they just sit there as, yeah, you know, uh-
(clears throat)
Yes, they-
There hasn't been any classification of units, I don't think, since
way... (laughs) Going, so they're-
Right, so we don't know whether they are the dodgy old units that are-
Uh, no, I- I haven't... Michelle's not here.
So, can we answer that and- and write and just be sure?
Yeah. Sure.
There is some issue about, but we talk about units as they are
and we work out the total value-
Yeah.
... depending on what the- the price of carbon is on the day.
Sure, no, I appreciate that, no, but the other thing is-
Yeah.
... I am interested in, is the age of units.
Yeah, I'll come back to you on that, if that's okay?
That'd be great. Thank you. I'm getting (overlapping speech) Thank you.
Yeah, that would be good.
Uh, so members, any further questions on this area
or, um, I'll open it up then to any general questions that members
may have. Um, Lan? Thank you. I just wanted to
come to, uh, compliance and enforcement decisions.
Okay, yep. Um, and really just opening it up for, I
mean, you say during the '24/'25 year, you concluded a
total of 271 compliance cases, which actually
seems like a lot. Um, and
139 indicated no breach of rules. Sorry, this is page
22.
Yep.
Um, and the remaining 132 re- resulted in an enforcement
decision. Can you give us a flavor, like,
of sort of the
breadth of this work? Is some of these
extremely, you know, resource-intensive and
takes essentially years, and some might just be a
minor...
Um, a lot of those where we've taken enforcement action will be minor and will
probably have resulted in, um, a warning letter
or, um, advisory letter to them. And in fact, I think that is
on page 23, the advisory.
Mm-hmm.
But we get a lot of reports coming f- into the system of
potential compliance breaches. Um, we're trying to work a
better system of triaging those, because there are hundreds that come through.
Most of them, as you can see, are on hazardous substances.
Mm-hmm.
Um, but we have to be very aware
that, uh, there are some important ones.
As you know, we had a successful prosecution, uh, this year on
the, um, particular chemical that's been, uh, utilized
worldwide for suicides and that had been sold illegally.
Um, that was one that triggered us and our priorities-
Hm. Mm-hmm.
... because we saw the nature of the- the chemical being used.
So, um, yes, there is a lot of potential breaches.
Most of them, um, are- are either minor or
a- a result of ignorance, people not keeping to the legislation.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
What about, um, the ones... Is that
CCRA? Is that Climate Change Response
That's Climate Change, yeah, yeah.
And what kind of... So, the- a lot of the penalties, uh, to do with that?
Yes, so-
Or what
is their role? Uh, that can be anything from, uh, individuals not getting their submissions
correct or not registering the fact that they have undertaken
activities where they should either be buying units
or, uh, adjusting their submissions.
Uh, often that's in forestry, and I think we've already
told the committee there is still an outstanding fine of about $21
million, uh, on an individual that will never be collected,
uh, which is related to forestry.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and again, that's a result of the pre- of the legislation that you have
this times three, um, effect. But generally,
um,
a lot of those, uh, fines are of a more moderate level
and- and again relate to, um, either
mistakes being made. Very, very few are intentional, but
mistakes being made or people not getting their submissions correct.
Okay.
And the le- the CCRA is very unforgiving.
That legislation has virtually no flexibility in it for us, uh,
to show discretion and discounting or saying, you know, "We
understand why you got that wrong."
Mm-hmm.
Okay.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, any further members' questions? Yes, Celia?
I've got two quite different areas.
Um, one is under your Connecting with New Zealanders.
Um, the EDNA, um, work you've done,
Wai2Whera-
Yeah, Wai2Whera.
... Otataia.
Yep.
Um, and I know that, um, the catchment communities have really
enjoyed working with that and a number of schools have.
Um,
to what extent have you or has it been Wilderlab...
Wilderlab? Wilder.
Wilder. Wildlab, yep.
Wilderlab.
Yeah.
Um,
have you used the information from that citizen science-
... and have you got, um, plans to extend
the program further on?
Yeah, so the, the program, that's been one of the most, if not the most successful,
um, engagements citizen science programs I've ever seen.
Um, we initially brought it into existence
to introduce eDNA as a compliance tool.
When I first began talking about eDNA to a variety of people,
both in this building and outside, they thought it was magic, um, and couldn't
understand what it was about. That was many years ago.
Uh, and I was getting resistance and pushback, so I thought, "Let's just take it to
the population." Uh, I think we created the world of that business
actually, uh, and good on Shaun. Um, he's now expanded into the
Pacific and Australia.
Mm.
Um, so we are restricted in funding how far we can take it.
I think we, uh, between us,
Shaun has donated something like 300 kits.
We've matched that, so we've got another, uh, I don't know how many projects
underway. So, we would like to continue that.
Um, there, there's the huge advantages of that, particularly when you think about
the new policy around gene technology, um, as
I, you know, I will go out to, and I have gone out to a hui in Ha- uh,
in Gisborne, where I, where I say you've got the,
um, the swan drone boots guys. I say that with no disrespect.
These are the trackers.
I have a swan drone.
Yeah, these are the trackers. These are the people who are out doing pest reduction
work, working the trees, and they stand up and they ask you an incredibly
technical question about DNA, and they say, "We did it." Uh, "I've got
it." Um, and, uh, so that's been
building. Our next phase, I hope, uh, under the leadership of the
EPA, will be to use it as a compliance tool because-
Mm.
... uh, I would say that we were the first to find the golden clam.
Uh, and we did that for an EDA, um-
Oh.
... sample in Mystery Creek, uh, and told MPI-
Wow, I didn't
know that. ... "You've got a problem." (laughs)
It'll be understated.
(laughs) Sure is.
Yeah.
Um, so WilderLab actually-
Wow. ... have a number of biocontrol kits for both marinas and else
that, um, you know, hopefully they'll be used one day.
It's, it's an incredibly sensitive, that technology.
It's an, it's an amazing technology.
It's amazing technology.
Really amazing.
So yeah, I'd like to see it expand. I'm a geneticist, so of course I'd like to see
it expand.
Mm.
And if anyone hasn't done an eDNA test in their-
You should do
it. ... local stream with their local school, it's fantastic.
Kids love it.
Mm.
It's like, just a syringe of water and then they get back this whole tree of
life. It's amazing, uh, yeah.
And it has actually expanded-
Again, another question.
So you're all-
Another question? Who wants to ask that?
Oh, sorry.
Yeah, yep. So have you got another question there as well?
Yes, just this one.
Okay.
Yes. Um, thank you so much for your service, Dr. Fraith.
Thank
I was-
I'm interested in your departure and how
you feel the EPA is standing for the future.
And, you know, I feel like we've had, um, all of our
environmental briefings today-
Yes.
... but we haven't actually had an agency that really
does, is specifically concerned with
environmental outcomes and environmental protection.
And do you have any comments about where you feel the country might be
at with that?
Um, I've got some comments about the EPA.
Great.
But that's all right.
Thank you.
Um, you, you have a gem of an organization, um, at, in
your portfolio, uh, about 250 people,
incredibly passionate about the work they do, um,
and who work incredibly hard to do what they think is, uh,
right for the environment and, and protecting it.
In the last 10 years, that organization has really matured.
Mm.
And the level of scientific expertise you have in there, Simon Upland came to the
board and said, "You have to protect it.
These are some of the best expertise I've seen both in chemicals, uh,
genetics, and elsewhere." Um, uh, I've seen them
become confident, I've seen them become assured.
Uh, no credit to me, but very proud of,
uh, the way that, the work they're undertaking.
The introduction of Maatauranga Māori was, was one of my highlights
in, in the last 10 years. Um, and we're seeing that
really come through the organization, uh, as
well. Uh, I think it, they will stand, uh,
Aotearoa, Aotearoa New Zealand in good stead.
Um, I think the work they're doing, um, and you
know, we are somewhat restrained as a regulator as being able to speak
out and advocate. Uh, that tends to get us in trouble.
Um, but I would ask you to encourage them to do so on the
occasions that you can.
Mm-hmm.
We're well-respected in Australasia.
We're part of PEPA network, Heads of EPA Australia/New Zealand, uh,
and they look to us quite often for, um, uh, direction and
leadership as well. So, uh, I, I think it's a country
that we've got lots of pressures, we've got lots of things going on.
Um, uh, and people throughout the country and the environmental system,
which is very fragmented, but if there was one plea I'd make to this committee
is please do something about the environmental system.
It's just so fragmented.
Mm.
We don't, you know, we all have to negotiate with each other of who's stealing and
looking after whatever. That, that would be the plea I'd make. Yeah.
Mm, okay, thank you.
Thank you.
Well, thank you, uh, Alan and Barry for your time tonight, for the
team as well. Uh, it's, uh, been a very insightful session and,
uh, look, Alan, we wish you all the best.
Thank you.
And, uh, thank you for your time with us.
Thank you over the years for-
Yes, definitely.
...
that interaction as well. A, a long time, so know we appreciate it and appreciate your time.
So thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you. And, and Grant, if you work out a way to get me that information.
Oh,
And just one comment. As I said, Madam Chair, I was asked if we had input on
Tonga species. We gave input on a number of things in relation to gene
technology, but I don't think it was Tonga, but I do believe we did give input on
non-indigenous, um, species. So something like king
murre, for example is not...
The first thing that I want to say is, you know, we have a lot of people who are
interested in the idea. And so it's not just about the technology and
the innovation that we're talking
about here. We have a lot of people who are interested in the idea of what
is going
to happen next. I think one thing that I've been thinking about for quite some time
now is how do you get people involved
with the idea
what's coming up next?
How can they be part of the conversation? You know, if you look at the history of the internet, you see that when things were
first introduced, people didn't really understand them very well.
They weren't sure whether they would
work. But then as soon as they started getting used to them, they realized that they could actually make a difference.
And so I'm wondering if you could talk about how do we get people involved with the
idea of what's coming up next and why
it matters to them in terms of their lives.